THE TELEGRAM

Her mother was dead. Her life stood altered.

She would be no poorer, it was not that. She was
an orphan, and all her mother had had came to her.
That meant seventy thousand pounds, plate, linen and
the freehold of a fine old house in Lower Seymour
Street, that they had moved into a year before the old
lady died.

Things were no more altered socially than they were
altered pecuniarily, for the Darners' set naturally corre-
sponded, as sets do, with their postal district, and Miss
Alice Darner could therefore continue to command an
entrance into the best circles. Only she realized that
she must henceforth enjoy all these good things to the
tune of a p^id companion, having no poor and amenable
relations handy whom she could draft into the household
economy, and afterwards snub into a colourless, bare
existence.

She was thirty-five, and her years did not weigh on
her, except mentally. The first faint physical signs of
the debacle were, so far, evident to herself alone, and
then only in moods of unusual depression. She was
still young enough to need a companion. Her pretty
red-gold hair was as red as gold, as pretty as ever, her
visits to her dentist as few, her eyes as deep, and her
step as elastic, although she had given up dancing.
She had made this sacrifice more from a sense of fitness,

B2 3



Digitized by



Google _



4 TALES OF THE UNEASY

as a concession to the needs of the young girls coming
up all round her, and who deserved their turn on the
floor, than of social necessity. As a matter of fact, she
had never been really fond of that over-energetic, dis-
ordering form of amusement. She loved the world and
going up and down in it immensely, and her way of
enjoying parties was to sit out if it was a dance, away
from the music if it was a concert, and in the back of the
box if it was a play. She was a flirt.

Not an outrageous, noisy, ill-bred flirt, but what is
known as a quiet flirt, with many strong and efficient
strings to her bow. Did one of them, being after all
only catgut or mere man, snap occasionally — that is to
say, get married out of the circle of her charm — Alice,
in her quiet way, promptly renewed the string, and
supplied herself with a new admirer, as good at fetching
and carrying as the old. In her mind that was the chief
use of admirers — to prevent one's looking neglected —
of course one never really was !

She was a woman of many "affairs " ; she liked living,
not exactly in hot water, but in water at least warm, and
was seldom seen talking to women, though she was
quite nice to them, as intrusive but law-permitted aliens
in the pays du cceur. None of her friends would have
dared to ask her to a ladies' lunch, or any over-womaned
party; a man had always to be "got for Alice," else
she would have been hurt, and quite unable to play
her part properly. She was unused to, unversed in her
own sex.

-On the other hand, she played fair and never took
other women's men, or encouraged their husbands to
play the pretty game with her. People said that for
her, that she never made women unhappy, only men.
She was never very sorry for a man's love-troubles, for



Digitized by



Google



.THE TELEGRAM 5

she had a theory that a hopeless passion or two did a
man no harm and that the more he proposed the merrier
— for him. She never told any one how many offers
she had refused. Men often did propose to her, and
she refused them all, and boasted that she had never
been engaged for even an hour, and that no man had
ever kissed her. The bloom was not off Alice, unless
so much mental coming and going in her courts had
produced some such subtle effect.

" Why should I marry ? " she used to say to E verard
Jenkyns (good old Welsh family), when he importuned
her to relax her rule in his favour, and even go so far
as making the vast experiment of marriage with him as
her partner. "There is no earthly hurry."

"No, but perhaps a heavenly one," he had inanely
replied.

"I may never marry at all. Girls, economically, don't
need to marry as they used to, and at any rate I am
independent so far as money goes."

"So the way is clear for you to marry for love."

"I don't think I shall ever fall in love."

"Then take a man you like — and you like me?"
Everard was not at that time sufficiently far golie in love
to make him inattentive to, and unappreciative of the use
and value of "cheek," in discussing such matters with
his princess.

"Yes, I like you; but, as you know, I don't love you.
And I'm so made that I must be quite sure in my own
mind that I am absolutely, positively incapable of loving
madly before I let myself go with any one, even you.
Don't you see, in the interests of morality, one must
be sure of oneself, or there might be catastrophe, with
a strong nature like mine ? "

"No," said Everard patiently and earnestly. "There



Digitized by



Google



6 TALES OF THE UNEASY

would, I am sure, be no danger of that with you. Your
husband might feel perfectly safe in your hands."

"Thanks. Why do you say that?"

"Because the power to flirt never implies the power
to love, I am afraid."

"Well, Everard, you can't say that I flirt with you ! "
she exclaimed noisily.

"Oh, no. Your knowing that I am desperately, dully
serious about you protects me a little, and you do pay
me the doubtful compliment of taking no trouble to
attract me. You honestly never put your best foot fore-
most with me, or pose like a heroine to your most
humble valet."

"Yes," Alice agreed, laughing a little bitterly. "I
promise you never to encourage you in any way. I
would let you see me with my hair in curlers, if I wore
them 1 Anything to convince you of the purity of my
intentions. I simply will not have you say that I lead
you on or encourage you."

" My God, Alice 1 I don't say it ! I know well

enough I am a d d fool and have nothing whatever

to go on."

"A fool to love me?"

"A fool because I am a lonely man and don't like
being a lonely man, and yet this feeling of mine towards
you will keep me so, so far as I can see. I don't sup-
pose I shall ever marry. I know I shan't. That's what
you've done, Alice, and I may just as well go away and
make my will in your favour, for I shall never have any-
wife or child to leave my money to. I feel that it will
be so."

" Really, my poor Everard " — she tried very hard not
to look flattered — " this is most sad. I couldn't have
believed there was such fidelity left in this wicked world,



Digitized by



Google



THE TELEGRAM 7

and to tell you the truth I don't believe it possible, even
now. I'm really not vain enough — if I am cruel."

"Not so very vain, and not a bit cruel. I honestly
believe if you thought you could get up any sort of
feeling for me, you'd say so. You never will say it to
me — but to some one else, I suppose. You are human
like every one else. It's all rot about not being capable
of loving ; every woman is or is able to think she is, and
that's enough in a great many cases. Oh, you'll find
the man sooner or later, and I — well, I shall wish you
every happiness and be godfather to the kids. Nice
little flirt's kids, with pretty hair like yours. Now, I'd
better go away to the Temple and make that will, as
I've quite made up my mind to die a bachelor."

"Nonsense," said Alice sharply, more touched than
she liked to own; "I won't even be friends with you if
you go on like that. Leave things open. Not for me,
of course. It must be quite understood that I don't
accept any such sacrifice of your life as waiting for me
would entail. Believe me, I know myself, and I know,
somehow, deep down, that I shall never fall in love with
you. That being the case, don't you think I should be
really behaving rather badly if I allowed you to think
that you could ever melt me by faithful service, and little
things like that ? "

"All right. Beggars don't choose. You shall have
the faithful service all the same, and it shall not hope
to melt you. Will that suit you ? "

"We'll leave it at that, then," said Alice, permitting
the young and promising barrister to kiss her hand,
and devote his wits and energies and the rest of his life
to her use. She could always find work for him.

He did it all as he had said. He was thus able to
be "about the house." That was his retaining fee.



Digitized by



Google



8 TALES OF THE UNEASY

Whether it was painful to him or not in his present state
of mind to see so much of Alice Darner, it was a fact
that he did have to meet her continually. She sent little
business-like notes round to his chambers nearly every
day — short, sensible, not encouraging notes. He made
all the arrangements for their journeys and their parties
and their entertaining of their friends. He saw her
mother and herself off to the Continent every year when
they went to do their cure, was attentive at the carriage
door, bought the railway literature, and pumped up the
air cushions. He could always be counted upon to be
odd man at a dinner party, and if it was humanly
possible, and sometimes when it was inhumanly impos-
sible, threw over any other important engagement that
he might have had — important to himself, be it under-
stood. His clerk thought he led a "dog's life." What
Everard thought was never recorded. What Alice
thought was simply this, that Everard liked doing little
things for her and was by temperament a born bachelor,
although he still cultivated that touching delusion
that he was lonely and wanted a companion. It was
only that he wanted her, and seeing her this way, every
day off and on, was really the pabulum his soul cried
for ; other and more full-blooded men would not have
been content with so merely spiritual a sustenance. At
any rate, he never showed any tendency to stray from
the portal and outer courts of this austere temple of
respectful worship. Alice had no cause for jealousy.
Her victim never twisted or wriggled on the hook of her
attraction, his ready smile on seeing her flourished as
ever, only there was more "drawing " in it, as expressed
by the hatchet lines of his mouth. In short, Everard
grew thin.
His chest was rather narrow. He coughed often and



Digitized by



Google



THE TELEGRAM 9

tiresomely. Lung symptoms seemed to be developing
themselves there. Alice, out of gracious regard for
him, had suggested his accompanying her mother and
herself to the Riviera one winter, instead of seeing them
off and falling back into the fog of Charing Cross as
usual. He had refused on the score of his pressing
work, promising, however, to wear a respirator on the
very bad days.

It was a pity he had not gone with them that time.
For all that she was a flirt, and men were her material ;
Alice didn't know them at all. She met a man out at
Cap Martin, a man Everard would have seen through at
a glance. This common adventurer made love to her;
he managed to engage the poor flirt's affections. There
was nothing in it, no magnetism. He was a better flirt
than she was, that was all, and while Alice had money,
he had none.

She returned, and confided her woes. Everard had
his work cut out for him. He interviewed this handsome
predatory person, and succeeded in retrieving Alice's
letters for her. It was a supreme bit of service, and
Alice was truly grateful to him. The wretch went out
of her life, leaving her in a rather deplorable condition
of nerves and mind.

And Everard threw himself into the situation as no
man who is not deeply attached to a woman unpictur-
esquely lovesick for another could have done. He
visited her every day, and comforted and consoled her
by allowing her to talk about it all. Alice's grief
furnished the theme for many a dreary summer's after-
noon, when Everard used to take her up the river to
distract her mind. It was a trip she had always firmly
refused to take with him in the old days on the score
of propriety, an excuse that masked dread of boredom.



Digitized by



Google



io TALES OF THE UNEASY

Boredom was not in it now — it was acute tragedy. Poor
Alice forgot all propriety when once she was towed well
out into mid stream. There she gave way and allowed
the echoes of Datchet and Laleham to echo with her
sobs. For she had been awfully hard hit. Once, indeed,
Everard remembered, but with no pleasurable sense of
a lover's guerdon gained, she had leaned forward in the
boat with the abandon of despair and kissed her patient
confidant. It was the only woman's kiss Everard had
ever received in his life, and it had tasted of salt tears !
Still, it was a love symbol, the nearest Alice could do
in the line he wished, or had wished, for perhaps he did
not now desire her quite so urgently as he had done.

Everard had never been handsome at the best of times,
but that summer season rang the final knell of his good
looks. His crow's feet and his cheek and jaw lines were
awful — Alice herself noticed them.

" I believe it is you, Everard, who are going to break
down now ! " she said to him once when it was all over,
her misbegotten love buried fathoms deep, and she cared
to look round her a little and notice what other people
were doing.

The very violence of her passion had perhaps caused
the flame to burn itself out in this young lady of the
world, this parlour warrior, this heroine of a hundred
ball-room fights. At any rate, her emotional crisis
passed away, leaving her who was already hard a little
harder than before to Everard's business precautions
and his adroit playing of animated safety-valve to the
deserted one. Alice, luckily for her, had not needed to
confide in a member of her own sex.

Her zest for "the noble game" of flirtation had died
down, too. She was less interested in men, and rather
more interested in herself than she had been, and con-



Digitized by



Google



THE TELEGRAM u

descended to enjoy a party, even if she came away from
it without the tendrils of a heart of sorts reaching after
her. Her superficial bloom returned ; she had never
lost, only temporarily mislaid it. She was a fundament-
ally good-looking woman, with neat, regular features,
a good figure and perfect constitution to fall back on.
To Everard's satisfaction she now proved the validity of
these fine assets of beauty.

But she had spoken a true word in jest. Everard
Jenkyns went and had a bout of brain fever. He was
popularly supposed to have broken down from over-
work.

Alice Darner and her mother were most kind and
solicitous, and as fussy about him as they could be
without setting the public tongue a-wagging. Alice
now worshipped on the altar of convention again, and
would not have been seen up the river with Everard or
near his rooms in Paper Buildings for anything. Her
mother was old and unwieldy. So they "wrote." They
were quite careful — but as it was A old friends opined that
Miss Darner was going to settle down and take up with
her old and tried suitor. When taxed with this by the
ill-bred privileged she maintained boldly that there was
nothing in it, that she and Mr. Jenkyns thoroughly
understood each other. So they did. Everard was
grateful without any expectation of favours to come, and
thanked her prettily for grapes and books and things.

He recovered, and went about his own business as
usual. Alice's business was not pressing just now, so
the two rather lost sight of each other, Alice holding
him in reserve for future extremity. She supposed, some-
times aloud, that he was "busy getting on " and making
up for the time lost in his illness. There could be no
woman in it?



Digitized by



Google



12 TALES OF THE UNEASY

" Rather a wreck — poor old Jenks ! " his friends
observed with affection, for he was a general favourite
with men, and most unfairly persisted in attributing his
state, not to the illness he had undergone, but to Alice
Darner's fast-and-loose playing. She heard this, but
tossed her head, confident in the good understanding
that subsisted between her and her slave.

"I have never encouraged Everard. He knows I
haven't," she declared to her mother.

"He says so. I think you have been quite horrid to
him, Alice ! " was the old lady's single solitary pro-
nouncement on the situation. She said this lying on her
bed during what was to prove her last illness. Alice was
gentle and kind, but repressed all sentimental leanings
on the part of the invalid, who had a mother's natural
wish to see a vagrant-hearted daughter settled in love
and marriage before she died.

"Mother, how often must I tell you that Everard —
Mr. Jenkyns — and I understand each other?" she re-
peated coldly. She had never chosen to call Everard
by his Christian name, though her mother, who was fond
of him, always insisted on doing so, and Everard
obviously liked it, and clung to this side entry into the
intimacy of Alice's family. It did not matter. Alice
and he, as before said, understood each other, and old
ladies, every one knows, have a way of attaching them-
selves to young men, and selecting their daughters'
suitors for them by the light of their own predilections.

And now, her dear, silly old mother was dead and
buried, and the proud, sensible daughter sat all alone
in the big Seymour Street drawing-room, with the three
large windows that needed so much stuff for their
curtains, and the beautiful Adams mantelpiece whose



Digitized by



Google



THE TELEGRAM 13

shelf Alice could hardly see over. The Darners had
only been in the house a year; it was freehold, and
Alice's. It was rather a large and dreary abode for one
young woman to inhabit permanently, yet the young
woman thought she meant to do so !

A companion, she sadly supposed, in that case must
be procured sooner or later — later, preferably; if she
could have her way, not at all !

Alice was nearly forty, though she looked younger.
Why should she not use her age for all it was worth and
establish herself on the easy footing of years of dis-
cretion ? Nay, there would be complications there ; her
womanly instincts rebelled against the aspersion of " dis-
cretion " and the constant assertion of her maturity
which would be involved in her adoption of that attitude.
She would be asked to play chaperon herself, she would
have to "dress old." No, she looked so young for her
age^ it would be ridiculous, when she could as easily
carry the other theory through and pose as a breakable,
compromisable commodity.

She must make up her mind to accept the duenna —
she must get in a woman to quarrel with ! It came very
hard ! She had been used to going about alone and
receiving guests by herself in this house; for the last
year Mrs. Darner had been unable to dine down or pre-
side at her own table. She appeared beautifully capped
and lappeted, to set the seal of chaperonage for a few
minutes before dinner, and then prettily said good-night
to her young guests when dinner was announced. Alice
was quite equal to it, and always invited another woman,
preferably married, to her charming dinners.

A companion would, by the conditions of her office,
take part in every function, "quiet" dinners as well as
noisy ones. It would be far worse than a husband, for



Digitized by



Google



i 4 TALES OF THE UNEASY

a husband would at least leave the tea-hour free. All
Alice's serious tete-h-tetes had been used to come off
then, in the little room off the stairs, that was really part
of the hall and in no way shut off, but so delightfully
private. Little, soft, rosy cosy late teas had been
Alice's great social weapon; all the more fetching were
these free and easy interviews in that she wasn't in the
least like an American, though she did see young men
alone, with a mother stowed away somewhere in the
upper fastnesses of the house.

This problem of the companion was associated with
the first glimmering in Alice Darner's mind, of the pos-
sibility of a husband's suiting at this juncture. The
notion of a companion precipitated him. He came in by
the door of convenience.

A husband ! Well, who was it wanted to marry her
at that moment ?

Men's names, long shelved, came into her mind, but
not Everard's. Like the poor, she had him always with
her. He was always available, but the others, unac-
countably enough, did not rush into the arena of her
requirements at once.

She must be growing old ! Did people think her old ?
She had not noticed that they did, she could see no sign
of "the coming of the crows' feet/' of which this "back-
ward turn of beaus' feet " was supposed to be ominous.
For surely, a year ago, plenty of potential husbands lay
ready to her hand ? . . .

The signs of age, if there were any signs, were on the
outside. Alice, internally, felt as fit as ever. She was
still game for anything in the way of social folly, she
could sit up as late as any one and dozed off happily the
moment she got home and her head touched the pillow.
She did not have to read in bed or play "patiences" to



Digitized by



Google



THE TELEGRAM 15

induce sleep. Her figure showed no fatal early inclina-
tion to "spread," she didn't know what it was to "sit
over a fire," and she proudly refused to avoid lobster
salad or anything else indigestible at supper. . . .

Unless, indeed, the craving for marriage itself was a
sign of age, a subtle token of the need for support, the
birth of an instinct for clinging ?

She rose and looked at herself in the old, unbecoming
Empire mirror that Everard had got for her at a sale
at Christie's once, for he was a connoisseur. No, very
few lines, no look of fatigue, even in a bad glass ! And
as much colour in her hair, that poor Everard admired
so, as ever there was !

Poor dear Everard ! . . . No, not poor dear Everard.
He had been growing rather slack lately, and forgot her
flowers and fish and game now and then. He had been
kind, of course^ and considerate over her mother's death,
had continually called to inquire, though the presence
of authorized relations in the house had rendered his
visits nugatory as far as she was concerned. Alice was
formal about death. She had seen much of it. Still,
she had liked to see his card in the hall, though unable
to ask him to come in because of Aunts Polly and
Gertrude. It had been an awful, unmentionable time,
the sort of life that everybody must lead at times, when
Death is in the house; but now it was over and the
aunts had gone home, making her promise to give them
a month at Taunton next week, when she had got things
a little straight and done seeing lawyers. And that was '
over, too. Her nerves, that had been a little upset,
though she had expected her mother's death, had righted
themselves, too. She cried about her mother every day,
but only once in the day, and she began to think she
should like to see some one who wasn't "family." Why



Digitized by



Google ^.



16 TALES OF THE UNEASY

should she not begin with Everard? When the com-
panion had come, or the husband, she would have very
little opportunity for tete-&-t$tes with him. Unless he
was that husband ? Well, we should see ! . . .

She settled that it was to be to-morrow, a quite im-
promptu invitation. If it were ceremonious she could
not have him alone, and she wanted him alone. She set
about ordering a nice little dinner for him, consonant
with his tastes, which unluckily she did not know.
Everard had dined in Seymour Street before, but only
on big formal occasions, never alone, so far as she
remembered.

Everard replied in fairly good time. He did not
say he was previously engaged — for he knew that she
would never forgive him for not throwing the other
people for her — but ill. At least, not ill, but with a Very
bad cold. As the dinner, she had said, was quite
informal, might he ask her to postpone it a day or two
until he had a little got the better of his cough, which
would make him a rather tiresome guest, apart from the
danger of chill, to which he found himself more liable
than formerly. He would like to suggest Saturday
night — his birthday ? . . .

"What a funny old-maidish letter," was Alice's com-
ment; "all about his cold and that! I never knew
Everard notice a cold before? I suppose a man gets
finnicky, living so much alone. He's no exception to
the rule. I'll have to wake him up a little. "

His cool deferring of her invitation afforded him just
that touch of masterful self-assertiveness Everard had
always lacked in his dealings with this young woman.
She now firmly made up her mind to marry him, that
is, if he continued to carry things off so well. He would
be better than a companion, and — there seemed to be
nobody else !



Digitized by



Google



THE TELEGRAM 17

At a quarter to eight on Saturday evening she was all
ready, dressed in black and looking very handsome, on
one side of the brightly burning fire, for there was a
slight touch of frost in the air. Her senses were alert,
she found herself actually listening for the sound of his
hansom driving up to the door. Quite loverlike, she
thought, with a little laugh, to herself ! She remem-
bered the last sentence in Everard's old-maidish letter,
which she passed over on first reading. He had in-
formed her that this was his birthday. She welcomed
this as a touch of sentiment — the sentiment she had not
in the old days been solicitous to cultivate in him, but
had carelessly let die. She wished she could remember
exactly how old he was to-day ? If she had been able
to allude to it it would have pleased him. . . .

No use, she could not recapture the knowledge. She
supposed he might be somewhere about forty ? And he
was late ! How dared he be late, for her ? Was there
a fog perhaps ?

She went to the window, parted the heavy curtains, and
looked out. Rather misty — but not enough to prevent
Everard from keeping time, if he had started early
enough to dress! How rude if he hadn't? She
remained drumming on the pane with her long, slender
fingers, looking down into the empty roadway.

She had not heard the door of the drawing-room
open, but suddenly, before she had time to turn away
from the window, Everard stood beside her with his
handkerchief held up to his face, a familiar gesture of
his for which she had often reproved him.

"How are you?" she asked him, rather frigidly.
"What a draught you seem to have brought in with
you ! "

"May I shut the door?" Everard said, suiting his
action to the words.



Digitized by



Google



18 TALES OF THE UNEASY

"Come to the fire, won't you ? You are cold."

She spoke more cordially, but, in spite of her definite
intention to propose herself to Everard that evening, the
curious sense of physical alienation which she knew now
had held them apart all these years, returned to her with
tenfold vigour. Her instinct had been right. Physical
leanings counted for something, and there was no real
affinity between them. Alice shivered a little, for she
was a sensible, business-like woman, and she firmly
meant to over-ride the absurd and awkward shrinking,
and marry him. Her mind once made up, she never
went back.

He was holding his thin, blue-veined hands to the
blaze. His eyes seemed to avoid hers.

"Yes, that's right," she said. "I hope you have got
a good appetite? I have ordered such a nice little
dinner for you."

" How kind of you ! But really, I eat very little
except fish. My doctor has cut me down remorselessly."

"And do you attend to him? You never
used."

" I have to attend to his orders. I am in rather a bad
way, Alice. The base of one lung is quite solid . . .
and the other is gone."

"Nonsense! I believe you're as right as I am,
barring this little bit of a cold, that you'll soon get rid
of. You haven't coughed once since you were in the
room, do you know ? I fancy that living alone as you
do, you go and get ideas about yourself, and then rush
out and call in a doctor who frightens you."

"May be," he said slowly. "Loneliness certainly
doesn't improve one's perspective. And I haven't been
inside any one else's house for a month."

"There now, what did I say? And what do you do,



Digitized by



Google



THE TELEGRAM 19

when you are at home? Sit over the fire and grizzle,
"and think of your sins — and mine, eh?"

" Not yours — much ! " said he, with a chilling effect
of partial forgiveness which benumbed Alice, whose
fighting spirit was up in arms to bring him to her feet
again.

The maid announced dinner, and Alice took his recal-
citrant arm, which gave her the sense of being glued
to his side. On the way downstairs she thought, " Poor
dear, he will want civilizing all over again ! "

"You'll drink champagne?" she suggested, when
they were both seated.

"No, water, please." He added, speaking to the
maid, "Thanks, no soup ! "

He allowed a helping of fish to be placed on his plate,
but he did not eat a mouthful, that Alice could see.

The dreary dinner progressed. Alice Darner ate for
two, and every now and then looked furtively at the
man she had made.

It was her fault; she saw it now. This man had
been her slave ; she had been his inhuman master. She
had laid him on the rack, she had starved his heart, for
bread she had given him a stone. This was what their
famous understanding had amounted to; the ruin of a
man, a pale, thin, hectic mask, sitting opposite her,
pretending to eat — the play of his thin wrists that
manipulated his knife and fork drove her frantic — his
sullen eyes refusing to meet hers, as in tones that only
faintly represented the rich, soft, legal, measured voice
she used to know, he responded gently but dully to all
her conventional openings, and allowed the subjects she
started so painstakingly to drop one by one. What
would the servants think ? Little pearly drops of dismay
and effort broke out on her own white forehead; the
c 2



Digitized by



Google ^



20 TALES OF THE UNEASY

effort she was making was too much for even her social
fortitude. Yes, she knew she had behaved badly to
him, but he might let her down more easily I Vexing
of him I For what she had to do, must be done, in
spite of difficulties.

The last course had been removed, two punctilious,
slightly shocked maids had disappeared, and the couple
were left alone over the walnuts and the wine.

She spoke to him quite crossly, in a voice she could
hardly command. "Aren't you interested in anything,
Everard?"

"Yes, dear, in some things — for instance in your
calling me by my Christian name — for the first time,"
he replied quietly.

Alice felt uncomfortable. Such a direct thrust from
this petrifaction suggested that he had seen through
her, who hardly realized herself, and what she was
doing.

"Oughtn't I?— I forgot."

"Oh, don't apologize, it doesn't matter. ... I wanted
you to badly, once, do you remember? Strange, when
it does come — one is more or less past caring "

"Coffee?" she asked. "I make it myself now, as you
see!"

"Yes, please."

She made it. She handed it. She even let her fingers
graze his as she passed him the cup. It was literally
the first time she had ever practised her own special art
of flirtation in Everard's connection.

Then there fell a silence between them. The patent
coffee machine ceased to bubble. Its duties were sped.
. . . Alice, sipping a restorative draught of the tonic
liquid, broke the silence bravely. She felt that she owed
it to him to take the initiative.



Digitized by



Google



THE TELEGRAM 21

"I am feeling very lonely — now," she said
softly.

"Poor child, you must be," he answered gravely.

"And I think I — I understand a little better how you
must have felt all these years."

He lifted his fishy eyes for the first time to hers.
"Yes, but I am used to it, now."

"But, Everard, it hasn't done you any good?"

"No, I daresay not."

"Everard, do you think — now — do you believe we
— you and I, I mean, would have got on together?"

" How do you mean ? In what relation ? "

" I mean — in the usual relation — if I had wanted what
you wanted?"

"Well, you know, I thought so, then."

"Not now?"

"No, not now. Did I not tell you that I had grown
philosophical? Whatever is, is good."

"Oh, dear I Then you tell me that you think it is
good, your living alone, with not a soul to talk to, or
exchange an idea with, no one to look after you when
you are ill, as you are now, but just to sit mooning over
a dying fire "

The ghost of a shrug was vouchsafed her. "Oh, I
keep my fire up, and I mix my own grog and drink it,
and warm my own slippers. It isn't so bad."

" Everard ! " She rose to her feet and he imitated
her, supposing that a move to the drawing-room was
contemplated. "No, I am not going up yet, not till
we have had this out. You do make it very difficult
for me. It is as if you had lost the key — you will not
understand A demi~mot!"

"Why should it be & demumot? " he repeated after
her, catching, however, none of her fire. He sat down



Digitized by



Google



22 TALES OF THE UNEASY

again and motioned her to do the same. Then he spoke,
dully, but very clearly,

"Let us talk quietly, and not get excited over it. A
man in my condition has no time for vagueness. I do
understand, quite well, and I will show you that I do.
You are willing to marry me now?"

"Yes," she cried breathlessly. "Yes, poor Everard!
And you — you don't want v me to any more?"

"I want nothing I Don't think of me. Let us con-
sider only you. Now tell me, would this marriage be
of any use to you ? "

"Use to me to be married to you, Everard?" She
started.

"Sorry, but I can only put it from the point of view
of utility. My personal desires are dead."

"Ah, I killed them."

"Yes, my dear, you killed them. I can't pretend to
any extravagant feelings of joy at what I suppose
we must call your capitulation. You know, they give
better terms to beleaguered fortresses the sooner they
surrender? You, Alice, in your pride and impreg-
nability left it too long. The wine got musty in the
bottle, the cord got frayed and rotten. I am no good
to you or anybody. My life is done. I thought all
this out as I lay there — wrote some of it down even.
I never thought I should get a chance of telling it
all to you in person. I could not rest. In my
delirium "

" Delirium ! Oh, Everard, what nonsense ! "

He put her exclamations aside. "Well, I have told
it you now, and I shall rest in peace."

" If it's any consolation to you, you have had a good
scold — a good go at me ! " Alice cried angrily, adding
with bitterness, "And plus the satisfaction of refusing
me ! "



Digitized by



Google



THE TELEGRAM 23

"But not at all!" he said, turning surprised, lack-
lustre eyes on her. "If you think a marriage with me
would do you any earthly good, you shall have it. I
ought to have made that clear "

"I wanted to do good to you!" she wailed.

"Too late for that. I won't pretend, even to salve
your conscience, Alice, that I care anything at all about
it. Besides, your conscience has no need of salving.
You were perfectly right not to marry me, in your
heyday and mine, if you could not love me; you are
very kind and perfectly in order to suggest it now, as
a way of making me useful to you, as you have done in
the past. I am at your service now, as ever. I am
reserved to your use, as good as married to you already,
though not you to me, and quite ready to go to church
with you to-morrow, if you decide that we shall do so.
I am your property. . . . Only, my dear, it is a pity
you tied me up in brown paper and left me on the shelf
so long. Fatal delay ! Unused, I deteriorated ! You
have had me warehoused so many years that now, when
you choose to untie me and take me down, you find that
you have to make allowance for depreciation of stock.
I think I wrote that to you — or said it ! . . . How it did
amuse Mrs. Clarkson ! "

"Who's Mrs. Clarkson?" she asked through her
tears.

He did not answer, but rose, and took her in his arms.
Pale flickers of posthumous triumph lighted up his kind,
lined face. Weakly victorious, he enfolded her, and she
shrunk and shivered out of his embrace.

"What is it, dear?"

"Nothing, oh, nothing 1 Only, I don't believe I can
marry you, Everard, after all I "

He did not ask her why, and she could hardly have
told him that the momentary contact had affirmed the



Digitized by



Google



24 TALES OF THE UNEASY

sense of physical aversion she had always thought she
felt for him. Now she was sure. Oh, what was she
to do ? . . .

She stood timorously away from him, as it were freed
from the clasp of a corpse. How could she tell him
that? And then she reflected consolingly that accord-
ing to his own words marriage meant so little to him
now, that she need perhaps never kiss him when they
were married.

Her colour returned a little as she formulated this
evasion. . . . Many a conscientious woman has forced
herself before now to marry a wreck, to pay conscience
money.

There was a good fire burning, she motioned him to
one of two leather-covered chairs drawn up on opposite
sides of the fireplace. "It's warm here. We won't go
upstairs. I am really getting rather , frightened about
you, Everard. I was incredulous at first, but I do
believe now, that you have been ill."

"Yes, I have been very ill."

"But why come out? Why didn't you send an
excuse — ask me to come to you ? "

" Would you have come ? Well, as a matter of fact,
a telegram was sent you. Mrs. Clarkson said she had
sent it."

" Mrs. Clarkson — your landlady — your bedmaker ?
Oh, dear, how unkind you must have thought me 1 "

"No, I don't know that I thought anything about it.
I said she might send it, and then it passed out of my
mind entirely. Everything did go clean out all at once,
somehow . . . it's a most unusual sensation — very like
death, I should think."

"Everard, I believe you ought to be in bed now, you
ought not to be here — pleasant as it is. Go home, and



Digitized by



Google



THE TELEGRAM 25

I'll come and nurse you to-morrow. I can safely do
that. I am — engaged to you ! " She spoke with mouth
awry, putting the greatest constraint upon herself.

He smiled. "Awfully kind of you, dear, but I've
got a nurse already. Mrs. Clarkson is a nurse."

" Everard ! you're dreaming ! Do you mean a white-
capped creature, with starched cuffs? How could you
be here if that were so ? "

"I don't know, but I am here, you see. Mrs. Clark-
son certainly did send you a wire to say I couldn't
come. She asked you to come to me, I believe, though
I forbade her. As I told you" — he sighed — "I forgot
it all. . . ."

"But then why have you come, and why haven't I
got the wire ? "

"Wrongly addressed, I fancy. I was too ill to speak
much. She looked the address up in my book and I
have only your old one there."

"It shows how I've neglected you."

"But it's as well you didn't come. The nurse is
excellent. These hired people do best because they
have no feelings, whether it's merely putting on a
poultice, or finally laying you out "

"Oh, don't, Everard!"

He rose. He looked preoccupied.

"It's after midnight. Do you realize how late we
have been talking, right into the night? The daylight
will surprise us in a minute ! . . . Oh, dear me ! I
must be off." He rose, and stood, wavering like a wind-
blown taper. "Good-night, dear Alice, I shan't forget
you have kissed me — once in your life. Oh, no, twice ;
once on the river — that day, the twelfth of July. I
loved you — I wish you had loved me too ! "

"I; did — I do," she averred, her lips chattering.



Digitized by



Google



26 TALES OF THE UNEASY

"Too late ! " said he, taking a woollen comforter out
of his pocket.

"Everard, I don't think you are fit to go home alone.
Let me send some one with you. Or stay here, the
servants are not gone to bed, and there's a spare room,
slept in only last night. Aunt Polly "

"And your reputation?"

"I'll risk that," she said. "I've behaved too badly
to you not to make you some amends."

"But it's all nonsense. I am all right. Strength
has been given me "

"How funnily you talk! Well, since you will be
foolhardy and go back to your nurse — is she pretty?
You know I don't believe in her. You are thinking of
your landlady, who's been mothering you a little, as
she should." She put out her hand and rang the bell.
"A hansom, please, for Mr. Jenkyns."

"You shouldn't have done that," he said. "I meant
to walk."

"Well, you aren't going to be allowed to walk ! You
must take no risk. Have a good night's rest, and be
well enough to marry me to-morrow — by special licence."
She looked up in his face with terror-stricken audacity.
How could she do it !

"Would you really?" He was out in the hall by
now, and the maid was whistling for a cab. "Well,
we'll see ! "

"I'll come to you at eleven in Paper Buildings. I
know the way. I've been there once."

"Dear Alice, how unmaidenly you are grown all of
a sudden ! I like it, though. It is some compensa-
tion "

"But will you really marry me if I come?"

"If I can," he answered gravely.



Digitized by



Google



THE TELEGRAM 27

The hansom had come rattling up. She gave a twist
to the comforter. "Keep it well over your mouth. . . ."

"I will kiss your hand first."

She controlled herself. His touch was pain to her.
She wailed, as the hall door closed —

"Oh, I don't love him ! He is dead. I have killed
him ! Til marry him, that is my vow ! "

The strayed telegram was brought her next morning
on the tray with her tea. It had been as Everard had
surmised, wrongly addressed to the old house. It ran —

"Mr. Jenkyns unable to go to you to-night. 111. Come
if prefer."

"She must have been in a rare fright when she wrote
that, whoever she is ! " thought Alice, who could not
bring herself to believe in the presence of a nurse in
82 Paper Buildings.

Her exaltation of last night had left her. Everard
was such a wreck, poor dear ! Every bit of charm, and
he never had much, had departed and left him sear,
dry, stupid and unsympathetic. But she meant to marry
him, and repair her sins, and be able to live without
a companion. Even an invalid husband was better
than a hired solacium. She would go and see him this
morning, but of course they could not really be married
at once, out of hand, like that. In a week or so, after
a few preparations had been made and when he had been
nursed up and made to look a little less ghastly. She
could not allow a ghost to lead her to the altar. Then
they would go off somewhere warm for the honeymoon,
to the Riviera or Egypt, and Everard would revive under
the combined influences of sun and agreeable society,
and love — that is, if he was still capable of feeling the
kindly glow of a delayed, but at last gratified passion.



Digitized by



Google



28 TALES OF THE UNEASY

Perhaps he was not quite so dead after all ; perhaps
in time she would find herself able to submit to his
kisses without a politely suppressed shudder ? Though
she could easily account for that symptom of hers.
Starved physically and mentally, as he seemed to be,
what wonder that all the magnetism had gone from
him ? Alice, none other, would nurse him back to life,
make a charming, attentive, affectionate husband of him,
one whose kisses she would get not to mind so much.

She drove down to the Temple and dismissed her
carriage at the gate on the Embankment, and walked up,
quite unnecessarily, for Everard's rooms in Paper Build-
ings had a road in front where a carriage might stand.
But she did not mind walking. It was a lovely
morning. The famous fountain in the court was play-
ing merrily, and suggested springing hopes of all sorts
— and possibilities of revival. She walked along to
Everard's rooms with a light step, laughing a little to
herself at the thought that she was going to earn for
him the reputation of being "a dog." She did not
suppose many young ladies sought out the dry student
lawyer in his rooms 1 His landlady, or laundress,
whichever it was, would be shocked, and a good thing
too. His character was altogether too immaculate, and
a picturesque smudge or so would improve it in the eyes
of men. Alice had all the sweet, headlong depravity of
mind of the excessively innocent. Using her tortoise-
shell pince-nez, she read the name of Everard Jenkyns
printed on the wall on the right-hand side of the open
door of number eighty-two, and plunging into the dim-
ness, began to ascend. She met a man on the first
landing who looked like a doctor. He seemed in a
hurry to get to his hansom, which she had observed
standing there. He merely peered in her face and



Digitized by



Google



THE TELEGRAM 29

passed on before she could ask him if he was the doctor,
and if so, how Mr. Jenkyns was?

She went on ascending till she found the right door,
knocked, and stood there, breathless. ...

A foolish fear assailed her as she waited. She found
herself dreading the first sight of Everard as he would
appear on opening the door to her; she remembered
with annoyance the poor, lank, gawky face, which
always made her think, as she used to tell her mother,
of a boy's compendious clasp-knife, with all the blades
open I He would smile, of course, and look pleased to
see her ; it was a strong step for haughty Alice Darner,
whom he had sighed for so long, to visit a man in his
rooms at half-past eleven and ask him to marry her !

He was a long time coming ! . . . She rang again,
more firmly. . . .

The door was opened, by a nurse. Everard had not
been raving, then I He was probably in bed ? . . .
She formally muttered his name.

The nurse seemed to have been expecting her.
Murmuring, "You would like to see him, Ma'am ? " she
led the way into the sitting-room, out of which the
bedroom obviously opened. The door was ajar. The
nurse did not stop. . . .

"But not in there ! " Alice stammered.

A strong note of disapprobation pierced in the
woman's voice as she turned round sharply —

"Why not? He's dead. You're not going to
faint?"

"Oh, no," said the poor girl, striving to adjust herself
to these new and unexpected circumstances. Like a
proud, plucky automaton she entered the bedroom, and
looked on the form that was faintly outlined under the
sheet, so thin Everard had grown. She had good



Digitized by



Google



30 TALES OF THE UNEASY

nerves, and could always bear shocks well. But an
immense, searching pity, a world of value for the dead
man, combined with self-depreciation, filled her, and she
wept silently. Her noble calmness and self-restraint
won the admiration of the nurse, who had been con-
demning the heartless creature wholesale for having left
her sweetheart to die alone as she had done.

"What was it, Nurse?" she asked.

"Double pneumonia. Collapse. I telegraphed to
you, Miss — you are Miss Darner, I believe? He
objected, but when once he became unable to speak, I
took it upon myself. I thought you would want to be
here."

"Of course. But I have only just got it."

The nurse accepted the amende. She could not realize
that Alice was struggling to form a comment on the
apparent inconsistency of a man sick unto death being
able to dine with her, hoping at the same time that dates
would be proved not to fit and all be normally explained.
She stammered something vague as the nurse laid down
the covering sheet, and disclosed the still face, looking,
however, no more emaciated than Alice had seen it in
life and no longer ago than last night.

Alice was painfully aware of the tacit suggestion
on the woman's part that she should bend down and
kiss that waxen mask, and recoiled, though the nurse
had said no word.

"Oh, I can't kiss anybody dead. . . . It's awful of
me, Nurse, but I can't ! "

"Some can't! " said the nurse resignedly. And this
girl was the poor gentleman's fiancee, so she had
understood? . . .

She was a little pacified when Alice unfastened the
bunch of lilies of the valley that she was wearing, and



Digitized by



Google



THE TELEGRAM 31

laid them on the dead man's breast. Then she turned
away and dried her eyes. She was a beautiful creature,
the nurse thought, and was conscious that the faulty
young lady was slowly acquiring her sympathies.

"When did he die ? When was it ? "

"We don't know exactly, Miss. In these cases

But he last spoke about seven."

"What made you think of sending to me?"

"Because, Miss, for days before, when he was wander-
ing worst, he talked about you. We gathered, the doctor
and I, that he was more or less engaged to you, Miss,
but that you was rather too fond of putting him off.
Said it had been going on for years, and that he was
fairly worn out. So he was, poor man; he hadn't an
ounce of flesh on his bones to spare "

"Yes, but " the girl exclaimed impatiently, "I

want to get at the facts. He died, you say, this morning
at seven o'clock ? "

"Spoke last at seven o'clock last night, Miss, I said.
Died some time in the night, or, may be, directly after
he did speak. At least, part of him may have died, as
ignorant people seem to think. He was hardly breath-
ing at a little before eight, but the last spark may have
held on longer."

"I suppose you know, Nurse, that he dined with me
last night, at a quarter-past eight," said the girl stonily,
looking away from the nurse's apathetic face, which
changed at once, sympathetically; —

"Miss, you're upset! You took it so calm at first.
Have some brandy. You have had a shock. One
understands "

" He dined with me," Alice repeated obstinately.

The nurse stared at her, and shrugged her shoulders.
Poor girl ! She was evidently one of the outwardly



Digitized by



Google



32 TALES OF THE UNEASY

quiet ones, who smother the symptoms of disturbance,
only to feel the shock more keenly. People take these
things in such a variety of ways. The idea of the dinner
party had got fixed in her mind by the shock ; she was
unable now to let go the idea of Everard's keeping his
engagement with her. She had received the telegram
all right, of course, there could be no doubt of it, and
some domestic reason had prevented her from respond-
ing to the summons. Or, possibly, that same back-
wardness and want of interest which had affected the
smooth course of the engagement had been at work.
She hadn't cared for him much, though she had been
persuaded into giving her word. . . .

In an even tone, calculated to restore the shattered
nerves of the shaken girl, the nurse remarked —

"Mr. Jenkyns' sister-in-law, the one that lives in
France, will be here presently, to see about the funeral
arrangements. He wanted you to have all his old china
and books, Miss, he used to say so, and doubtless that
will be done. . . ."

But Alice Darner had gone resolutely across to the
bed from which the two, in the course of conversation,
had unconsciously deviated.

She dexterously turned down the sheet, and stooping,
performed the rite of love, the little act of devotion which
she had refused him just before. What was she saying ?
Mrs. Clarkson observed closely what she considered
one of the curiosities of mental stress.

"I kissed him last night, when he came to me. . . .
So you see, whether I liked it or not, I did kiss a
dead man 1 And it's no use minding now, is it ? "

She kissed him repeatedly, with a pale semblance of
passion.

The nurse took her arm gently and led her away



Digitized by



Google



THE TELEGRAM 33

from the bed, and she submitted to be placed in a
chair.

"Miss, now you've done that, you'll feel better. I
should go home if I were you. Take that hansom
outside. It's the one you came in, perhaps — and you
haven't paid him?"

Alice signified a negative to this, helplessly, but
allowed the nurse to pin her veil on for her. It hid
her tear-stained face a little. Then the good woman
led her downstairs and out on to the pavement. Sure
enough, there was a hansom waiting there, and the
nurse hailed the driver.

Gruffly, he turned round, and stared at them.

"And I say," he appeared to be remarking, "and I
say, who's going to pay me my fare ? "

"Why, the lady will, of course. Get in, Miss, I'll
hold your dress away from the wheel."

But the cabman was not satisfied, nor did he address
himself to the task of resuming his drooping reins. He
seemed to have had a shock too.

"No, I didn't mean her. Who's going to pay me
three bob for last night and for waiting 'ere ? . . ."

"That's no affair of ours," replied the nurse cheer-
fully. "You must take the lady — where to, shall I say,
Miss?"

Alice, crouching inside, mumbled the address of her
home.

The cabman swore.

"No, I'm damned! You get out. I ain't a-going
near that blasted house again for nobody 1 Took
a fare from there last night, I did, and drove him
here, and here I may stop till Domesday, I suppose,
before I sees a shilling of his money ! 'Tain't
right! . . ."

D



Digitized by



Google



34 TALES OF THE UNEASY

He was obviously drunk, but not dangerous, so the
nurse thought.

"Come, come ! " she expostulated.

Alice, frightened, prepared to get out.

"Oh, what's the matter?" she moaned.

"Matter! Matter's this. I drove him here right
enough, and pulls up where he told me — and my gentle-
man doesn't get out, seems as if he was a-going to
make a night of it in my cab. Drunk, I says to my-
self, and I opens the trap, meaning to take my fare and
clear him out, but Lord bless me — why, there wasn't
no one there ! "

"He'd got out, of course," said Mrs. Clarkson, "while
you weren't looking."

"' Bilked,' says I. And, thinks I, I'll just come and
wait here till I sees my gentleman come down those
stairs again."

"You'll never see him come downstairs again," said
the nurse, with a flash of inspiration, "except in his
coffin ! Come, get on ! Take the lady where she wants
to go."

She thought of it all — afterwards . . . but then
nurses see such queer things ! She had taken the cab-
man's number.



Digitized by



Google



THE OPERATION



D 2



Digitized by LiOO? IC



Digitized by



Google



THE OPERATION

"Yes, I think that might hang a day longer. I can
finish up the mince for my lunch, and you must do some-
thing with the turkey legs for dinner. Let me see — and
there's fish to-day. And then — well, suppose you make
a savoury ? "

"Master don't care for savouries, Ma'am ! "

"A sweet, then. I don't care. And that's all, I
think?"

Mrs. Joe Mardell, in her neat morning shirt, coquet-
ishly finished with a man-like tie, and the severity of her
attire much modified by the bows and loops of waved
hair that crowned her head, turned and was about to
leave the dark basement of the little house in Kirriemuir
Street, West Kensington, when a door in the upper
regions banged.

"There, he's off, and I wanted a cheque!" Mrs.
Mardell observed with mild irritation. She glanced at
the kitchen clock with a degree of confidence she did not
place in the elegant time-keeper, cased in jewels, that
hung on the front of her shirt. "Why, it's only half-
past ten ? "

"Master's early gone this morning," said the cook.
"Gladys took his breakfast up only ten minutes ago."
She paused, then summoning her courage, she asked —

"Ma'am, are people usually buried on Christmas
Day?"

37



Digitized by



Google



38 TALES OF THE UNEASY

" Why, you silly woman, it depends on what day they
die. Who's been dying ? "

"I'll swear," said the woman eagerly, "that I saw a
corpse being carried down the steps of number thirteen
just over the street opposite nearly a week ago, and I
reckon it back Christmas Day ! . . . It's been worrying
me ever since. Yes, I saw the mourners and hearse and
feathers and all — done quite proper. I was looking out
of the front staircase window "

"Neglecting your work, Vance? Serves you right.
You saw Whiteley's sale cart, perhaps? You were
looking sideways through the red panes, and glass,
you know, refracts oddly. . . . Who lives at number
thirteen ? "

"Oddly enough, Ma'am, I don't know, though I
mostly could tell you the navies of everybody in the
street. I might ask one of the tradespeople — should
I?"

"Yes, do if you like. Brr ! " She shivered affectedly,
strong in the pride of her health and good looks. "It
seems a cold time to choose to be put into the ground !
One would sooner be cremated, this weather ! "

Holding up her crisp befrilled skirts, the second wife
of Joseph Mardell, the popular comic actor, who was
just now drawing crowds to his Christmas extravaganza
at the "Quality," made her way up from the dark base-
ment to the abodes of light above. Noiselessly, she let
fall behind her that swing door at the top of the staircase
which effectively divided the world of society from its
service, and exchanged stone and oil-cloth for soft carpets
and silken curtains. It was a very pretty little house —
her house. She admitted Joe into it. Her husband-
lover, Joe. She had managed to keep him her lover.
All wives should. She glanced, as she passed by, at



Digitized by



Google



THE OPERATION 39

the hat-stand in the hall. Joe had stupidly gone without
his fur coat, though it was freezing. Or was it that it
needed a stitch ? How careless of Gladys ! He had left
his big umbrella too, for there it bulged in the rack,
beside her own delicate silver-topped one. Careless Joe,
willing enough to ignore the mere physical claims of the
self he morally bowed to ! Moreover, he forced every
one else to do so likewise. He must have his own way,
and brooked no check where his mental desires were con-
cerned. It was perhaps the secret of his sway over men
— and women.

She thought of him, Joseph Mardell, the greatly-
sought-after, and hers, with complacent affection,
glancing up consciously at the branch of mistletoe which
was entwined with the square glass lamp that hung over
the front door. Joe had passionately kissed her under
the mystic bough, a week ago, for luck, on the first night
of the successful piece. And luck had come, and seem-
ingly remained with them. The booking was splendid.
And they were rehearsing a more serious play that was
to follow the Christmas jollity. Joe was so busy he
didn't know where to turn for a spare five minutes. She
did not complain, for if things went on like this they
would be able to move out of West Kensington, where
you couldn't get a smart parlour-maid to stop with you.
Gladys and her finger-nails was a sore trial.

She entered the dining-room, and her eyes sought the
sideboard. Ah, Joe had had some sense after all, and
had remembered to refresh the inner man before leaving,
as the violated Tantalus betokened. He lay in bed late.
He rarely breakfasted, and never with her. She rose at
eight — on principle ; she could not afford to keep actors'
hours and ruin her complexion.

She stood pensively by the small piece of Sheraton



Digitized by



Google



40 TALES OF THE UNEASY

furniture before she opened a drawer and took out of it
what she had come to seek. Last night's oranges and
apples beamed there on a pretty dish. Joe's cigarette
boxes, flung about, needed tidying up. The presentation
silver bowl given to Joe by his fellow-actors on the occa-
sion of his first marriage, shone in the centre with digni-
fied lustre. They had chosen something quite different
to present to him as a memento of his second venture.
That was in her room now. The bowl had a dwarf fern
in it now, but sometimes it ran over with punch, or was
packed with roses. Another use was contemplated for
it; if Joe and she were to have a baby, which, sadly
enough, did not seem likely, the bowl would be used for
the christening.

Mrs. Mardell took a pretty little checked duster out of
a drawer, and went upstairs to her drawing-room on the
first floor. She carefully picked up an iridescent bead off
the carpet, the spoil of the dress she had worn last night,
and placed it on an ash-tray. She then proceeded to rub
up the several minute objects on her silver-table, wishing
heartily that she could afford to have them lacquered,
and thus dispense with her daily task. So occupied, she
looked wholly pretty and half domestic, a little soubret-
tish, like those neat-aproned maids who flutter early
about a stage-scene and usher in and lay the tables for
tragedy.

There was no harm in Florence Mardell. She was a
smart, novel-reading, Sandown and Ranelagh going
woman, easily dressed, easily amused, a little detached,
perhaps, in her interests, and careless of the more serious
issues of life, but quite willing to simulate and assume
social crazes as they came up. She played a good game
of Bridge. She glanced at the deep Reviews as well as
the Windsor and Pearson's, and improved her mind on



Digitized by



Google



THE OPERATION 41

the slightest opportunity. You could always get her for '
a subscription lecture of sorts, and she quite approved of
Female Suffrage, without, however, actively concerning
herself in its propaganda. She never "fagged." She
was always beautifully dressed in a severish, strapped,
mock-manly style, and could wear successfully the very
largest hats when they came in.

She had been the widow of an officer, and had lived at
Wimbledon in a big dull house standing in its own
grounds. She had first set eyes on Joe Mardell playing a
strong " Macheath " in The Beggar's Opera, to the most
ineffective "Polly Peachum" of Julia Fitzgerald. Miss
Fitzgerald was his wife ; had she but known it, it might
have made a difference, but very likely it would not
have. Then and there she had fallen in love with the
actor across the footlights, impulsively, violently, madly,
and she had not rested, being of an acquisitive, pug-
nacious, predatory habit of mind, until she had per-
suaded a journalistic friend of hers and his to bring
about an introduction. With her effective crown of real
golden hair, waved and curled in extremis, her clean,
fresh suburbanity, she had fascinated "Macheath." He
was known to be weak, volage, and full of moods.
Florence was, on the contrary, strong and pertinacious,
she had taken him in a mood, and let her love profit by
it. With fond remorselessness she had driven him to
drive his wife to divorce him. All this she had com-
passed in her own calm detached way, as if unconscious
of the larger issues she was stirring — another woman's
happiness, a man's honour, and an actor's art, for Joe
was a genius, and recognized to be one, in spite of, some
people said because of, his strange limitations. A little
man, almost a dwarf, he could play the burly Falstaff
and the courtly Biron; he could write articles in the



Digitized by



Google



42 TALES OF THE UNEASY

Reviews; he could hold supper-tables in a roar. Julia
Mardell's happiness had been sacrificed, for she adored,
and was known to adore, her husband. To oblige him
she had condescended to make use of some of the more
complicated and recondite cogs of the machinery of the
English law of divorce, and had tamely surrendered,
without humiliating him, one of the most fascinating
men of the day to another woman. Yet Julia was quite
as good-looking as Florence, if in a different style. She
was the full-souled, full-breasted, large-eyed Junoesque
female type, and only undertook the playing of a minx
like Polly Peachum to suit Joe. Such a majestic walk as
hers, such dark swimming eyes were of no avail to the
actress who aspired to play one of the wayward mis-
tresses of the highwayman. It was the measure of
Julia's love and her power of self-abnegation. Joe was
prepared to take the whole play on his own shoulders,
only he must have a sympathetic woman to act with.
He did find Julia sympathetic in those da^s when he
loved her, and before the pretty widow from Wimbledon
had leaned out of her box and shaken her golden locks
at him. Then one day the two women met. Matters
were arranged. Joe, susceptible, weak, hustled and
busy, succumbed. . . . Lawyers acted for him. Julia
was compliant: Florence "keen." Joe worked on and
was divorced while rehearsing a new play. He himself
never knew how it all happened !

There was a large signed photograph of Julia in Joe's
study now, standing unframed, concave and dusty on
the mantelpiece ; Joe had not dared, or cared, to give it
a more polite or permanent abiding-place. Indeed,
Florence had had some thoughts of removing it from its
even so humble position ; her friends wondered how she
could possibly bear to have it there for Joe to see every



Digitized by



Google



THE OPERATION 43

day ! But she was capricious. One never knew how
she would take things. It was their expressed opinion
which perhaps induced her to let it stay, curled up and
drooping slavishly as time went on, and the dust and
heat of the fire brought its proud head low.

Florence bore Julia no grudge, she should think not,
indeed ! Julia had been very good about it, had made
no difficulties, but on the contrary, had smoothed and
made easy the path of divorce for the man she loved.

That is, if she really did care for Joe. She had been
so terribly callous in her interviews; so full of zeal to
give him his freedom. It was hardly human, so the
woman who had profited by her action thought, and
certainly not very womanly. Florence could not imagine
herself allowing a cold business-like lawyer to dictate
her a letter bidding Joe come back to her herewith; $
summons intended, of course, for ultimate publication.
It disgusted Florence, this horrible business of sueing
for restitution of conjugal rights ! Julia's formal peti-
tion was refused by Joe in another cold letter, equally
intended for publication. Florence had actually read the
two inhuman missives printed together in the daily paper.
Divorce had followed in due course.

" Oh, you tamely died ! " Yes, little frivolous
Florence, who had never read Tennyson, would have
taken the advice of the Egyptian and would have "clung
to Fulvia's waist, and thrust the dagger through her
side." She was a true woman, like Cleopatra, and knew
that the elemental passions, once raised, must have full
mastery. A man all to oneself or nothing ! That was
her philosophy.

The feelings of the man in question ? The state of his
affections? No matter! Florence did not see herself
considering them, or taking any deadly sex insult lying



Digitized by



Google



44 TALES OF THE UNEASY

down. She considered that Julia's poor-spiritedness did
really verge on meanness. She had accepted money
from Joe — an allowance to enable her to leave the stage.
Report said that she had grown stout. Report said that
she had taken to drink. Lies probably, so generous
Florence said. Nobody in Florence's world knew any-
thing about Julia excepting Miss Walton, who had
introduced them. And though the two women had con-
tinued their intimacy, it was with the tacit agreement
that the name of Julia should not be mentioned between
them. There were plenty of other subjects to talk about.
Miss Walton was, like everybody else, more than half
in love with Joe. . . . Funny how they all were !
Rather nice; — for Joe's wife, since Joe did not bother
with any of them. . . .

Mrs. Mardell, after having polished the silver dili-
gently, turned her attention to the room. She ordered
the chairs, according to some abstruse social system of
her own, and flicked her duster about feebly here and
there. She did not feel very "fit." Rather queer, on
the contrary ! All-overish ! She could not have told
you what it was, but she was mysteriously conscious of
something excessive — something outrageous, like severe
pain in wait for her. She seemed to apprehend its near-
ness instinctively, as a patient seated in the dentist's
chair watches the eminent practitioner's feet moving and
is aware in all his sensitive enamel of the imminent
grinding of the file that has been set going.

Perhaps it was the long-continued strain of the cold
that was affecting her. The frost had lasted since before
Christmas, and had been very severe. . . .

She paused. The little clock on the mantelpiece
tinkled half-past eleven. Supposing she were to give
herself a slight moral fillip — go upstairs and try on her



Digitized by



Google



THE OPERATION 45

new dress, and see how it fitted, after having been
"back" twice. She was sure in this way to obtain a
sensation, pleasurable or otherwise.

She mounted another flight, feeling every step to be
an effort. She lit the gas-stove in her room, and dis-
missed the dilatory housemaid, whom she found on her
„ knees examining the pattern of the carpet. Then she
dragged- a tall cheval glass into position, having due
regards to unbecoming cross-lights, and undressed. Her
white, handsome shoulders appeared; she looked ten
times prettier than she had done in the severe morning
shirt and tie, and she knew it. She stood for a few
minutes before the mirror, complacently admiring her-
self and in no hurry to don the heavily-trimmed corsage
that awaited her verdict. It lay beside her, half in and
half out of the flowered cardboard box, interleaved with
tissue-paper, and with intersecting lines of tape winding
it into its cage. Her eyes rested on it with feminine
appreciation of the elaborate building of the silk lining,
with its white bone cases crossing and recrossing the
back of it, and the high collar which was to fit in under
the very lobe of the ear. Still she deferred the pleasing
moment of assumption, standing still and preening her-
self ; soft lappets of valenciennes lace flowering out as a
frame to the pink skin. . . .

Suddenly, taken by surprise, without a cry or a moan,
she cowered and was bent, bent nearly double. Agoniz-
ing pangs shot through the framework of her body.
Her eyes were glassed over with tears, and through
them she stared out on the world, bewildered, peering
to see from which point the next arrow of dolour would
fell !

It came again, without fail it came again, this time
no stabbing thrust, but a sword, driving, delving labor-



Digitized by



Google



46 TALES OF THE UNEASY

iously through her vitals in a lingering, painstaking
manner. She was by now prepared and well frightened,
and she groaned aloud. Her breasts rose and came
together, as in some strange health exercise, under the
laces and ribbons. • . .

My God ! Was it ? Was the silver bowl down-
stairs going to be used at last ?

No, it could not be. The thought was dismissed as
soon as formed. A chill on the liver? The extreme
cold. . . . What a fool she was to prance about like a
peacock in front of a glass for half-an-hour half dressed t
What else could she expect? That silly stove gave
no heat. . • •

She gathered to her a dressing-gown that lay near and
sat still, cowering. A long pause ! She could not
think. But she received no physical intimation of the
recurrence of her agony.

Five minutes later she boldly rose, defying it, and
, tore the new dress out of its rustling ward without stop-
ping to untie the tapes that controlled it. With a screech
of tissue-paper it yielded itself into her hands, and she
put it on.

Then she laughed. The pain was forgotten. She
wriggled about happily.

"Yes, it still catches me . . . just there ! They must
have it back. I'll go to Madam about it, on — let me
see? — Tuesday. . . ."

Taking the precaution of putting her arms properly
into the warm dressing-jacket this time, she wrapped the
dress up again, tied the white tapes across it, put the lid
on firmly, and with the little stylograph Joe had given
her, methodically scored out her own name from the
label, thus substituting that of the dressmaker printed
all over the box.

The exertion, slight as it was, roused again the smoul-



Digitized by



Google



THE OPERATION 47

dering fire of pain. She sat down helplessly on her bed,
giving herself up to it. Her eyes were like those of a
dumb animal in the death anguish, as she stared across
at her reflection of her already distorted features in the
glass. Rolling to and fro, she grasped and relaxed
alternately the fronts of her peignoir, knotted feverishly
in her palm.

"What the divil is it?" she murmured. "I feel as if
my life was going ! "

She did not think of calling any one — Vance or Gladys
the impotent housemaid; no one could help her. She
was but a poor human passage-way for these relentless
throes that passed Juggernaut-like through her shrink-
ing body. It was like a garden roller, when it was not
like many scythes set on one axle turning, twisting inside
her. What had she ever done to suffer so ? No child of
Joe's could be so cruel and tear its mother thus ! . . .
Nay, she had not conceived, unless it was some mon-
strous impious growth that was rending her, and would
not soften or relax till it killed her. . . . She really
thought she was going to die ! . . .

Presently, when all was quiet again in the tortured
battleground of her body, she rose and pushed her hand
through her bows of waved hair and flung it back hide-
ously and crossed the room. Apologetically almost, for
fear of provoking a recurrence of the horror, she dragged
herself downstairs, and to the swing door at the head of
the kitchen stairs. She now felt the need of a confidante.
She must tell some one. The housemaid was too young.
Vance was fairly motherly. Pushing open the door, she
sat down on the top step, with her peignoir gathered
round her, and stretching out her legs allowed them to
hang over into the dark abyss of Vance's domain.

By the time she felt able to raise her voice and call
Vance she had decided not to confide in her. The cook



Digitized by



Google



48 TALES OF THE UNEASY

would immediately "think things," and she wanted no
fuss. It was not "that" either, she only wished it
was. . . . For then there would at least be some com-
pensation in baby fingers to smooth pain away.

In response to her weak summons the cook appeared
at the foot of the stairs. Even in the dim penumbra of a
London basement, a person unpreoccupied by her own
symptoms would have realized at once that Vance was
discomposed — agitated in some unusual way. Her cap
was hanging by one hairpin, her floury arms were ner-
vously rubbed one against the^other. But Mrs. Mardell
noticed nothing in other people to-day. She addressed
Vance slowly and deliberately.

"Vance, please I want you to make me a nice cup of
tea — at once. I shall not be able to eat any lunch. I
think I'll wait till six, and have something with Mr.
Mardell."

"Ain't you feeling well, Ma'am?" asked the cook
spiritlessly.

"No, not very — a little all-overish. It will be nothing,
only I don't feel like eating a solid meal."

" Nor I can't say I feel like cooking it ! " Vance
observed bitterly. "I'm that upset! I've been across
and asked."

"Asked what?" inquired Mrs. Mardell wearily.

"About the funeral that I saw with my own eyes
leaving that house on Christmas Day. . . . It's not
natural, I said, to go getting buried on Christmas
Day "

Mrs. M'ardell interposed impatiently. "You don't
mean to say you went and asked at the house if they'd
had any one die there ? Really, Vance "

"It's no good saying that now, Ma'am; I had
to know. And it's only a Nursing Home, not a



Digitized by



Google



THE OPERATION 49

private house, so I've done no harm. And" — the
woman's voice grew low and hoarse — "nobody ain't
died there — not yet — that's all ! "

She put her apron to her face.

"Good gracious, Vance! " Mrs. Mardell cried. "Tell
me more about it 1 "

"Ma'am, they've only got one patient there — a lady.
She was going on all right, but she had a relapse this
morning, just about half-past eleven, their cook said
it was. She had an operation three weeks ago, and no
good, and it's got to be done all over again this after-
noon at two o'clock, and they can't tell as it will be
successful, this time."

"Well, my good woman, don't you worry. Let's
hope that the lady will get over it. People do, you
know, or there would be an end of nursing homes. I
really feel so poorly myself that I can't get up much
sympathy with other people's aches and pains. Be quick
and get the kettle on, or is it boiling already ? "

"Yes, Ma'am, you shall have it in a minute. Ma'am,
you may not believe me, but I seen a proper funeral,
and the hearse waiting, and the corpse carried out and
down those steps . . . and the bearers with crape on
their hats and so attentive, and one of them was no
bigger than Master. ... I thought of Master the
moment I saw him. . . . And she was a big woman, for
she took a big coffin. . . ."

"You are settling that it's the woman who's lying ill
there now who has got to die, I see. What's her
name ? "

"I asked, but the girl didn't know it, only that she
was an actress."

Mrs. Mardell gathered in her legs decisively.

"Come now, Vance, don't stand there gossiping and

E



Digitized by



Google



o



Q TALES OF THE UNEASY



unhinging yourself with fancies ; get me my cup of tea.
I shall be all right, I expect, when once I have had some-
thing warm. Bring it to my room. I shall lie down a
bit, I think."

She rose to her feet, closed the swing door, dismissing
Vance and her dreary soothsaying vision, and passed
upstairs. Her day was spoilt. The pain did not seem
to be going to recur, luckily, but the deadly feeling of
uneasiness which had succeeded it certainly increased.
Her legs were weak and could hardly carry her. People
who have seen an apparitioti are said to feel just so. But
as she reflected it was Vance, not she, who had seen
the ghost 1

She paused half-way up the stairs to look out of the
wiridow on the first landing, whence Vance declared she
had watched the lugubrious tableau. Mrs. Mardell had
never gone in for knowing her neighbours, it was wiser
not, or else she would have been aware of the industry
that was carried on at number thirteen, a red-brick sham
artistic villa, just like her own house — like every other
house in the street. She could only make it out by
pressing her face against the window, and then she only
saw it aslant, and red, through tHe vicious stained glass
that occupied that particular pane. Eight steps led up
to the front door of it, as eight steps led up to hers.
Surely it was awkward for the incoming patients — many
of them, presumably, too ill to walk? She wondered
what sort of cases they took there. It would depend. . . .

Julia, she had heard, had grown very fat — at thirty.
. . . That indicated something abnormal, in a youngish
woman ! . . . Something that had to be removed,
generally. . . . She laughed. . . . She wondered
why she laughed. . . .

"Your tea, Ma'am!" said Vance suddenly at her



Digitized by



Google



THE OPERATION 51

elbow. "I thought I would bring it up to you
myself."

Mrs. Mardell was a little ashamed that Vance should
discover her staring out of the window at the scene of
her absurd cock-and-bull story. She turned and coldly
bade the cook precede her to her bedroom with the tea.
Vance accepted the rebuff meekly. She looked cowed
and thoroughly upset, and as if no merely domestic
trifle could affect her now, broken to tragic issues as
she had been.

The tea, as Mrs. Mardell had expected, revived her,
and enabled her to lay a nice little plan for a quiet after-
noon indoors. She proposed to telephone for Miss
Walton to come and sit with her for a bit. She needed
something or somebody to pick her up. Of course there
was Charlie Bligh, a nice boy whom both she and Joe
liked ; she might telephone him to come and take her out
to dine, as he often did. . . . But no, she wasn't looking
Carlton form ; it wouldn't be fair to Charlie to ask him to
take out anything that wasn't gay and smart. Besides,
it would be rather mean to leave Joe to eat his dinner all
alone when she had not even said good-morning to him.
She had often left him for dinner, of course, and he had
never thought of objecting, verbally at least — but just
now that he was so busy and overworked she felt sure
that he would like her, sitting beside him at his dinner,
even though she could eat nothing. She saw herself
delicately invalidish, in her soft draperies, picking at
some grapes. . . . She felt mysteriously drawn to Joe, dear
Joe, who was working for her now, who never attempted
to control her social movements, who took what she gave
him and was always as ready to flirt with her as if he
were not married to her ! She had managed Joe well !
No, she wouldn't leave Joe to-night, but get Miss
e 2



Digitized by



Google



52 TALES OF THE UNEASY

Walton, who would surely stay with her till Joe returned
about half-past five, as usual.

Miss Walton, over the telephone, signified her willing-
ness to come and have a good chat. Mrs. Mardell made
up her mind to take things easy. She was really unwell,
she had eaten nothing since breakfast, she felt empty,
shaken, swelled and sore. She could not have got her
exquisitely adjusted corsets on if she had tried, or
endured the pressure of them round her body. A tea-
gown was clearly indicated. She assumed one, and a
little lace cap that went well with it. Sighing deeply,
she lay down on the rose-coloured chintz sofa in the
drawing-room, shaded by a soft standard lamp, breath-
ing timorously, existing furtively, unnoticed. She
hoped it would pass her by, this brooding eagle of pain
waiting to tear her.

She had brought her jewel-case downstairs with her
and idly toyed with her trinkets. There were three
trays, lined with velvet. They twinkled with precious
stones. She took every piece in order and examined
them slowly, seriously. All the while, her fingers
seemed to know that down at the bottom of the box lay
their real objective, a thin, crumpled, tousled letter folded
small and turning up at the corners. Florence Mardell
had received it a few days after her marriage, and
although it was only a letter from a woman, had forborne
to show it to her husband.

The letter was not actually malicious or even disagree-
able, but it had dismayed her, and shocked her. She
had kept it in case Julia should ever choose to lay aside
her extraordinary tolerance and become human again.
She read it over now to remind her of what it contained.
Indeed she had intended to do so when she fetched the
box. The by-play with the jewellery was only a blind —
self-deceiving, a sop to her superficial consciousness.



Digitized by



Google



THE OPERATION 53

"Now it is all over, my strivings have not been in
vain, and Joe passes from me to you. You must not
mind my writing to you, Florence. I think that, on the
whole, you will prefer to know what I feel, and that the
woman you have supplanted is not your enemy. Joe
loves you, and as the woman Joe loves, you cannot be
abhorrent to me. Convention forbids me to be your
personal friend, your feeling possibly, and perhaps my
own, for I am but a woman after all, and the open wound
that was left in my life when Joe was torn from my side
would be chafed and kept raw by the sight of him merged
now in your life. Yes, it is better so. I cannot, will
not, see him either — though Joe is not conventional. . . .

"Joe is nothing that is not splendid. I did, I do love
him so passionately, that I cannot hate you, Florence,
as you see. You are the fair new temple in which he
worships the spirit of Beauty and Love and Life. The
law has clanged the door to, none may dare to interrupt
the Litany he prays there, on his knees. God bless you.

"But oh, my dear, keep him there. Never undress
the altar. No more shifting for Joe, if we women can
help it. He is a great man — he must be treated like a
great man. These upheavals are bad for him, from every
point of view. So be practical as well as passionate, and
condescend to learn from me, who failed, how not to lose
him. Only approximately can you learn, for the wind
of art blows its children where it listeth. You know
what an artist he is, and all artists are nothing but divine
children. But, Florence, on your life, don't treat him
as one. Don't let yourself * mother ' him as I did and
be mad enough to sink the mistress in the sister, the
friend even. That was my fatal mistake, I abstracted
my sexual self till I became at last the caterer for his
mere physical welfare, the confidante of his passing
flirtations. Oh, the bitterness of those smothered con-



Digitized by



Google



54 TALES OF THE UNEASY

fessions, those despairing returns of him, broken, marred
and dispirited, to the one who surely loved him I Do
this, my dear, as I did, and then one day he'll come to
you, as he came to me, and put his head on your knee
and ask you to divorce him. So you're both ruined in
your several ways. He cannot go through it a second
time.

"Now listen. You must. I know. I would have you
always a little inaccessible, puzzling, capricious even. I
would ask you to dare to appear selfish, if you can
manage it. Preserve your delicate tangibility, punish
any slight infringments of your rules, close your door
to him at nights when he has been naughty or careless.
What it will cost you! But it is the right way.

" You have an enormous pull by not acting with him,
believe me! One gets so common, so cheap to a man,
when he is used to knocking one about all over the stage,
as Katherine, say, or insulting one as Nancy. Stay
away from the theatre and accept as many dinners with-
out him as you can. Although there isn't the very
slightest chance of his losing you, don't let him feel as
convinced of that as you are yourself. You see what I
mean, don't you, Florence? I heard you were very
clever, as well as a little frivolous.

"I have thought all this out, in many sleepless nights,
for your benefit and his. Yes, it is Joe that I am think-
ing of, and shall think of till I die. And so of you,
too.

"Oh, don't for goodness' sake be offended by this
letter, or take a dislike to me, for whether you like it
or no, you will never be quite free of me, any more.
Thought, strong thought, does permeate matter and
finds itself able to overthrow its mere material resist-
ance. I have proved it, no matter how. I won't weary



Digitized by



Google



THE OPERATION 55

you with attempted explanation. I should not fancy
you were psychic. But be sure that there will be a
little of me in all your relations with Joe, I shall have a
word in your menage and you must not let the thought
of it make you uncomfortable. Do you suppose I could
have let him go so easily, if I had not this power to
console me? Take it, as the slight penalty of kid-
napping a man out of the ward of a devoted woman.
You see how it is, he comes away, she offers no material
or spirited opposition, but he brings inevitably some
of her atmosphere along with him. Joe never actually
ceased to love me; he only began to love you. I never
misconducted myself — funny phrase! — so I am still his
true and faithful wife, bone of his bone, flesh of his flesh,
and where he is, henceforth, in some sort, I am. It
cannot be helped.

"It is a good thing that I am not vindictive and that
I don't hate you, since our relation must necessarily
be so close. I assure you that it will not inconvenience
you; annoy you, or trouble you at all, at least not until
the bands of the spirit are loosed in one of these great,
bare, soul-stripped, unaccounted-for moments of life,
that come to all of us sometimes. Then, you know, one
can't tell, or foresee. . . . The spiritual bonds and
relationships assert themselves and enforce attention.
... J can't quite promise to shield you, then, to free
you from the circle of the charm. . . . But are you so
frivolous, Florence? Won't it interest you — awe you —
soothe you?

"Ah, don't fear me, don't hate me — bid your flesh
comply with me. ... I am only the ghost of a wife

a power of love that can't circumscribe itself, even

though it would. There is a physical lien between us,
undoubtedly. I won't drag it if I can help / . . • I'll



Digitized by



Google



56 TALES OF THE UNEASY

try to control — I don't know what I am writing — some-
thing writes for me. But trust me. Julia."

"What a cat ! "said Mrs. Mardell.

She folded up the letter again and laid it at the bottom
of the box. It was almost actionable, she thought, a
threatening letter. Or else the letter of a mad spiritual-
ist — utter sentimental, impossible rot. What would
Charlie Bligh, or any other daylight person think
of it?

Strangely enough, she had more or less taken Julia's
advice ! It was sensible, and thus she supposed
germane to her own character. She had not "mothered "
Joe, what woman in her senses would? She needed
no deserted, defeated schemer to hang about her, in
the spirit, to tell her that ! She knew men as Julia
with all her preachments had evidently never known
them, and the result of her wise treatment of Joe was
that he was devoted to her, extraordinarily so, for a
busy man. Of course he worked hard, too hard, harder
than he had done in Julia's time. It had happened
so, success had brought its own tension and high pres-
sure. He was not, as Julia and her friends might like
to suggest, trying to drown the memory of her in a
round of forced activities. He was only taking fortune
at the flood and making dramatic hay while the sun of
critics favour shone. Not for a moment did he regret
the step he had taken, his was an essentially light
nature, he never brooded, and he detested heroics. The
writer of that letter, with its tedious mixture of senti-
mentality and preoccupation with material cares, must
have bored Joe to death, in the days when she had him
all to herself and could claim consecutive opportunity
for worrying him. And now, of course, a masterpiece



Digitized by LiOO? IC .



THE OPERATION 57

of supreme tactlessness, like all failures, she turned
critic and took on herself to give good advice.

Florence Mardell laughed. The reading of the letter
had acted as even a better fillip than the trying on of
the dress, and had nearly made her angry. ,

" I suppose " — she tossed her little gold crowned head
— "that it is very good of her to give me the straight
tip, and volunteer to overlook my manage, generally,
like a sort of superior lady housekeeper ! I am not so
bad at it myself, thank you ? " She worked herself up
to a sneer. "Much obliged to Julia, I'm sure, for
haunting me, especially as she appears willing to confine
herself merely to bothering the sensible mistress of the
house, and doesn't go frightening the servants and
making them give up their places. Vance wouldn't
stop a minute "

Her brow furrowed a little as she remembered the
white, frightened face of Vance that morning.

"It's a fairly cool thing, though," her thought
resumed, "for one woman to tell another, flat, that she
considers herself ^part of her because she happens to
have adored her husband and does still, I suppose.
Man and wife — no, wife" and wife— are one flesh. . . .
Ha! Ha! . . ."

It was two o'clock, her face changed. Arrowy
tinglings, growlings as of a chained monster inside her
slender frame, punctuated her words. The pain had
come again. . . .

When Miss Walton came in she would ask her to
ring up a doctor. She could not have dragged herself
to the instrument now.

• • • • • • •

The front door bell rang. She heard Miss Walton's
cheery voice making inquiries about Mrs. MardelPs



Digitized by



Google



58 TALES OF THE UNEASY

health as she shook the balled snow out of her boots on
to the hall mat, and plumped her umbrella into the rack.
Mrs. Mardell sat still, physically incapable of rising-,
though she had had but a short bout of pain this time.

She had made up her mind to question Miss Walton
about Julia. Julia's affairs seemed for the moment
essentially her concern. She felt no malevolence to-
wards her in spite of the re-reading of the letter. Miss
Walton, the confidante, had never been allowed to see
that letter. She should see it now, if she was good
and satisfactorily confidential ?

" Well, dear, how are you ? " Miss Walton had come
in, her work-a-day nose reddened with exposure, and her
hands thickened with chilblains. "I suppose you are
feeling the continuous cold, like the rest of us. And you
know, you little minx, that you look best in a tea gown."

"Do I look well?"

"Well, a bit bleached,, perhaps, and your eyes rather
funny and starey, as if you'd been seeing ghosts?"

"Vance has, she says."

"A ghost in West Kensington ! Nonsense ! "

"It was a mock funeral, Vance says," Mrs. Mardell
remarked in an even voice. "Coming out of a house
in this street on Christmas Day, when there was nobody
died in it, as they told her." She looked closely at Miss
Walton's face. "Do you know any one at number
thirteen ? An actress, Vance says "

"Bless her. Christmas pudding, I should say. No,
T don't know a soul in this street besides yourself "

Mrs. Mardell, with a sigh of relief, leant back again.

"But, I say, Florence, you do look dicky," Miss
Walton continued. "What have you been doing with
yourself ? "

"Perhaps you'll say it is Christmas pudding with



Digitized by



Google



THE OPERATION 59

me too," replied Mrs. Mardell, laughing feebly. "But
I don't know — somehow, I've had a horrid day. I seem
to have got a sudden attack of lumbago, or sciatica or
something."

"It doesn't sound likely, at your age."

"No, does it? But it's pains right through me at
intervals all through the day. I had a fearful bout,
just before you came. I daresay it's nothing "

"Rheumatism, probably," said the other. "Nothing
so absurdly painful when it gets hold of one. Here's
tea — nice hot tea. It will do you good."

"I've had two goes already."

"Oh, have a third ! Nothing like tea for us women !
Here, let me pour it out. Your poor little hands are
trembling."

"No, I'll manage. Sugar? I forget if you take it?
And lots of milk ? . . . Alice, how long is it since you
saw Julia ? "

Mrs. Mardell was surprised at the coolness of Miss
Walton's reception of the seldom pronounced name.
She might have reflected that the other woman had no
particular reason to be shy of it, for she had been
Florence's and Julia's confidante during the stormy
times of the divorce and had managed to be loyal and
friendly to both. She now replied offhandedly to Mrs.
Mardell 's question —

"Not for six months. Lost sight of the poor dear,
rather."

" And when you last saw her, how did she look ? "

"Handsome, but rather too fat. I can't say I much
liked the look of that, for she's still quite young. I
always fancy it means morbid growths, and that kind
of thing. Poor old Juley ! One never even sees her
name in the bills now, does one ? "



Digitized by



Google



60 TALES OF THE UNEASY

"Retired on the allowance Joe makes her, I suppose,"
said Florence Mardell bitterly. "I can't think how she
could bring herself to take his money ? "

"Only that she's poor, of course."

"How poor ?''

"One can't tell," replied Alice Walton, "with people
like Julia. She's Irish. She's the kind of woman who
pays a man from Douglas's to come and wave her hair,
and dry it on towels that you can't see for the holes !
You understand. She's the sweetest, cleverest, un-
tidiest soul alive ! She took a flat in Paris with a friend,
and the state of that flat, I'm told, after a week of Julia,
beat even the femme de menage they got in to do for
them ! They never dressed or ate, but lay about all day
in peignoirs and smoked cigarettes. They got in a
hypnotist to talk to them about Joe, I believe. Julia
makes no secret of her devotion to Joe, as I suppose you
are aware? . . . Now, Florence, keep your feet up —
there's a good girl ! You look ghastly."

"Yes, I know. So she's still mad on Joe? Tell me
more about her. She isn't a woman of much taste, I
fancy — can't dress a bit?"

"No, but a generous creature, full of impulses and
never a mean one among them. I do admire her
character, I confess."

"So do I," said Florence Mardell. "And so did Joe,
I believe."

"Does. He can't help seeing her qualities, and being
flattered by her immense devotion to him. Though, of
course, he's used to it — he can't help being faskynating 1
He's such a sprite and yet so strong. Julia was as big
again as he was, pretty nearly. He admired her
awfully, as little men do always admire big women."

"I'm not very big, yet Joe admires me."



Digitized by



Google



THE OPERATION 61

"Oh — I know he does and long may he continue.
He may, for Julia, that's one thing, she's strictly ' hands
off/ I know. She's never made the slightest attempt
to get him ever to go and see her."

"He wouldn't go if she did."

"I shouldn't be too sure of that," said Miss Walton,
carried, by love of her subject, beyond the limits of
tactfulness. "And what would it matter? Joe was
truly fond of her till you came along, you little witch !
And she's never done anything to set him against her
or hurt his self-love. That's what a man minds. I
don't see how he could have refused her a thing like
that, nor could you. No, give her credit for her gener-
osity, I believe he proposed it and that she refused to
see him, steadily. Nobody in theatrical circles thought
for one moment you'd keep him against her. The
betting was all that, if she had tried, she'd have got him
back in a month."

"No, not if she'd tried, she wouldn't," said Florence
Mardell earnestly. "She loved him too much ! "

Her lips sketched a grimace as she spoke; her hand
moved to her side and her eyes filled with tears.

" What is it, dear ? The pain again ? "

"I was afraid of it — my body was, I mean. But it
luckily doesn't seem to mean business, this time. And
I don't believe I could feel any more,— I don't seem to
have any organs left. It's the peace of emptiness —
exhaustion ! Do, dear, let me go on talking and thrash-
ing out things. What I meant when I said that Julia
loved him too much, was this, that it is a mistake to
love so openly and make such a noise about it. Men
don't value affection that's cried from the house tops.
It just disgusts them. Love at breakfast, love at
luncheon, love all day ; it's sure to pall. Love shouldn't



Digitized by



Googk



62 TALES OF THE UNEASY

be mixed up with daily bread-getting. It should be a
speciality, not a sort of smoking mixture, advertised on
every passing omnibus."

"Go on, child, you interest me. Why, you yourself
simply adore Joe 1 "

A faun-like, tormenting expression Miss Walton had
never seen there, came over Florence Mardell's face, as,
in the weak exhausted voice of a privileged invalid, she
proceeded —

"I adore Joe as smart women permit themselves to
adore the thing they value and mean to keep. I believe
I prize Joe, not for what he is, though I'm aware he's a
genius, but for what he means to me — light and kisses
and frocks and champagne. There isn't so much of that
as there would be if Julia and her allowance didn't stop
the way 1 I love Joe because he's the fount of life to
me, because I feel good when he is in the room, and
dull when he is out of it. I happen to know that I
shouldn't feel that about him if he came to me ill and
hipped and unsuccessful. Sounds mean, but it's true.
I perfectly enjoy the placards telling me that he can
make a cat laugh, and critics saying he is like what
Garrick used to be. An ' abridgement ' — what is it ? I
am quite cross with him when the notices are poor, and
I don't in the least long, then, to take his head on my
shoulder and comfort him. It's he who h^s to comfort
me."

"Julia had a rather different theory I "

"Yes, and Julia lost him and I got him. She called
him her boy and her baby 1 He even told me so, saying
how nice it was of her. Quite sincere ! He thought
so, I daresay. I knew better, as if any man liked to be
made to feel small 1 She'd have handed the moon down
to him if she'd had it in her power, and when he cried



Digitized by



Google



THE OPERATION 63

for such a little easy thing as a divorce, of course she
gave it him. A fool, I call her."

"I don't know about that," the friend replied, com-
batively. "Greater love hath no woman, than she lay
down her marriage lines for her husband."

"Well, I love him, but I couldn't have done that 1 I
should simply have had to stick to him just the same.
And then — if he had thrown me over, nothing would
ever have induced me to take money from him ! "

"But if you were extravagant and nearly starving?"

"I'd have found a man to support me and buy me
frills ! "

"Then you couldn't have loved him, to degrade the
thing he had once set store by."

"If Joe had left me, anything could have become
of me for all I cared ! . . . I see what you are driving
at, Alice, you think I can't feel love as Julia does,
because I haven't got beetle brows meeting over my
forehead and a big contralto chest to sigh with. My
way with Joe, whether I do it from self-control or in-
clination, comes out best. A man like Joe needs a lot
of spoiling, but not from the woman he cares for. I
let outsiders do it for me. I don't cosset him, or make
a point of being home every afternoon from my calls
at an unearthly hour to dine with him. If a boy offers
me a dinner, I accept and Joe gives me my taxi fare,
and looks me over, and sees that my dress, for the other
man, mind you, is all right. Nor do I wait up for him
when he comes back, I just see supper's laid out all
right and the fire kept up ar>d go to bed. I don't make
him look ridiculous by fetching him at the theatre, as
some actors' wives do. Julia, I hear, used to take parts
that didn't suit her, so as to ensure her being on the
spot with him, every night. I never know where he is



Digitized by



Google



64 TALES OF THE UNEASY

and I don't go getting his pals to play detective and
tell me. I may be conceited, but I do flatter myself,
that wherever Joe is, he is thinking of me, and of how
soon he can get back to me."

"I think you are perfectly right," Miss Walton replied
rather sardonically. "It's the best view to take of
marriage, and for a woman married to a popular actor,
the only one. Do you happen to know where Joe is,
now ? "

"Yes, I happen to be able to tell you. He is at the
theatre, rehearsing the new play. They must be
through by now, though ! He'll be here in a minute.
I haven't seen him since yesterday. We dine together
at six o'clock ! "

"And it's half-past five now. Well, I must be off.
Good-bye, old girl, and I wouldn't neglect those pains
if I were you. I expect it's only rheumatism, but as a
general rule internal pains should not be ignored. You
look rather flushed "

"I must go and put on some powder before Joe comes.
Good-bye. Tell Gladys to come and clear away the tea
as you go out."

Mrs. Mardell was left alone, with two imperfectly
drained tea-cups and some broken crumbs of cake on
a Japanese tray. The spirit lamp under the kettle had
gone out — she missed its cheerful flame. She was
hemmed in, her knees were imprisoned by the flaps of
the tea-table so that she could not lie back. . . . She
felt disinclined to move and go upstairs for that dust of
powder that was to impress Joe. . . . Everything was
a bother . . . she felt very stupid, but she had no more
pain, thank God ! . . .

So she sat on, waiting for the maid to clear away the
tea things and set her free, bolt upright in her hostess-



Digitized by



Google



THE OPERATION 65

corner of the flower-begarlanded sofa, with the pink-
shaded lamp behind her, convenient for reading, only
she did not want to read. Her head drooped, till her
face was in shadow. Her eyes were fixed on a Liberty
cosy corner that adequately filled an ugly bare place in
the room but that no one ever sat in — and then and
there she had a vision.

It seemed to her that her sight pierced through the
faint scaffolding of white wood pillars that bore up the
inane piece of furniture. She had a view of a cold, bare
room distempered in pale green, and nearly empty of
furniture, excepting for a bed and an arm-chair.
Presently, she distinguished a table made of slabs of
glass, covered with bits of shining steel and physic
bottles. She smelt a strong odour of ether. Then
sundry persons surged into her field of vision, though
they had been there all the time; two white-capped
nurses, bending solicitously over a bed where a third
person lay with long black hair spread over the pillow.
A woman, who was speaking so faintly that Florence
felt rather than heard what she said.

"You are sure you have sent for him?" the image
seemed to say urgently. "Nurse! Nurse! It's the
' Quality Theatre ' ! "

"Yes, Madam, we have telephoned through — * Quality

Theatre.' It would have been as well ! Can you

not give us your husband's home address, Madam ? "

"I don't know it," the patient replied wearily. "But
he will be at the theatre. He is always at the theatre.
It's his life now. He'll come . . . he'll come ! "

"Surely, Madam "

The nurse turned away to speak to a colleague who
had apparently only recently left the room and now
returned. Florence then saw the features of the woman



Digitized by



Google



66 TALES OF THE UNEASY

on the bed, features never seen by her except across
the footlights, charged with bright white and rose.
They were grey and unrecognizable now, yet Florence
knew whose they were.

She heard the conversation of the two whispering
women the while.

"She's sinking fast," said the elder nurse.

"She'll last till he comes, I think," replied the
younger. "He's just telephoned through that he's on
his way here I "

With her words the whole house and its ramifications
were now revealed to Florence Mardell — as it were the
open front of a doll's house. She saw the steps leading
up to the door — there were eight of them — the hall, the
staircase and the room where the patient lay, at one and
the same time. She heard a jingling of bells and the
prod of a swift hansom suddenly pulled up at the
behest of the urgently waved umbrella of a man within
— her husband. She saw him leap out and dash up
the steps to the door that was flung open as soon as
he touched the bell. She missed no single stage of his
progress upstairs to Julia's room. The nurse opened
the door of it, admitted him, and passed out herself.
Florence recognized Joe's familiar gesture — the overcoat
hastily flung off and thrown aside, disclosing the dapper
little ordinary man, with the long lock of hair, that was
his mark of genius, lifting on his forehead as usual,
as he impetuously advanced towards the bed. She
realized the weak complaisance that stood for paradis-
aical joy on the face of the woman lying there, whose
light of life was too nearly extinguished to permit of a
finer demonstration. But the actor's face was a marvel.
This expression, evoked for the beloved dying woman
only, was of such a tragic madness as no mime could
ever hope to originate or imitate. Florence had never



Digitized by



Google



THE OPERATION 67

seen that look on his face, and sharp knowledge shot
through her that even if she in her turn lay dying she
would not see it then. A sob shook, but did not inter-
rupt her steady absorption in the sight spread before
her.

Her hungry eyes watched the discreet nurse left in
charge retire to the mantelpiece and thoughtfully
examine her sleeve links, as the lover, with passionate
solicitude and a cunning born of intimate usage, sat
down and laying his arms round his mistress's neck,
raised her a little, so as to gain her ear for the last
whispers of love.

As a ghost to earth returned, the second wife appre-
hended the dreadful sense of the words those two
exchanged together. Joe spoke with no sense of
renewal, but as if Julia and he had parted but a few
hours, or it may be days, ago. Florence could not
resent, but she suffered the first pangs of a lifelong
sorrow as she listened to Julia's faint sighs of content,
her weak rejoinders to Joe's protestations of undying
fidelity, his vows that turned to old, wise, baby talk, and
the promises she wrung from him so easily. . . .

The nurse still fumbled with her sleeve links, blinded
by unusual tears.

"You will see me buried?" Julia exacted, her hands
twisting in Joe's hair, playing with the long lock. . . .
"You will make all the arrangements for me, Joe, won't
you ? I want you — I want you to manage it ! . . ."

Vance was right. Joe was the puny ghost mourner.
. . . And Florence looked on eagerly again.

" It shall be our wedding . . . our re-marriage ! "
He soothed her. "We meet again — to part no more
. . . you and I, Julia, my Julia. . . ."

What did he mean to do when Julia died, as die she
must? It was very near now. Florence listened and
f 2



Digitized by



Google



68 TALES OF THE UNEASY

looked, their voices seemed fainter, more furtive; the
scene in the bedchamber was growing evanescent,
ra gg e d, as if there were rents in the film. She some-
times feared, so eager was she to see the whole of her
own tragedy, that she was beginning to distinguish
the wooden lines of the supports of the cosy corner that
framed and crossed her view. She realized that Julia's
hour was approaching and that the vision would fade
with its instigator. The doctor had come in and the
other nurse. She could detect on all three faces the
professional discouragement painted there by their fore-
knowledge of the event. They would look cheerful,
normal again, after what must be, was over. But Joe's
face surely could never be set in comic lines again,
those muscles, so deeply inured to tragedy, might never
relax or unbend. . . .

She knew it when Julia died, though at the precise
moment no one spoke, no one moved in the room for
a while. Julia died, where she listed, where Joe would
have her — in his arms. The shape of Julia would never
go out of them. There would never be room there any
more for Florence, whom he had not loved ! . . .
• ••••• •

She raised her head with a jerk. The pink cushions
and hangings of the Liberty cosy corner filled up the
lines of the woodwork again. The pillars framed
triviality as usual.

She was sitting in her own drawing-room, and Gladys
the stupid maid, was there — just come in to take away
the tea things.

Mrs. Mardell spoke.

"Dinner will be late to-night."

"Yes, Ma'am, I see it's just gone half-past six now."

"Your master is kept. ... He has things to see
to. . . ."



Digitized by



Google



THE OPERATION 69

Gladys, eager to show she understood, interrupted.
"Yes, Ma'am, Vance will keep dinner back."

She folded up the table and set her mistress free.
Mrs. Mardell had no more pain and knew she would
not have any more, but she sat on in her place until
seven, the hour at which her husband usually left for
the theatre during this piece, in which his part entailed
a somewhat lengthy and careful make up. . . .

She heard the twist of the latch key in the door below,
and for the first time in her life, shrank from meeting
the eyes of the man she adored with a new and passion-
ate love. But it was the lover of Julia who would come
in to her and say something kind, as usual. Kind —
merely kind was all he had ever been, in all these years
of her blindness. She put out her hands as if to push
him from her, and her lips almost framed the words,
"Stay, oh, stay away 1 "

No use, no use ! Her observation, tensely quickened,
told her that he paused in the hall, for there was an
abrupt cessation of all movement. He was hesitating?
. . . Then he made up his mind to the disagreeable
duty. So Florence read the gesture. His sturdy dutiful
footsteps could be heard ascending ... a wild whiff
of ether seemed to precede l\im ! . . .

Her eyes dropped uncontrollably, as he touched and
turned the handle of the door gently. ... It was done.
He was in the room.

How did he look ? She must know. She raised her
sad eyes, and contemplated the dwarf-actor standing
there on the threshold of the pretty cheap drawing-
room, oppressing, appalling her with his overpowering
dignity. His hair was disordered, and clung, matted,
to his damp forehead; the long lock fell over it in the
style of one of the good-natured roysterers he excelled
in portraying. But his face had the make-up of a



Digitized by



Google



70 TALES OF THE UNEASY

clown ; the dark features stood out in a mask of putty-
coloured whiteness, all but the lips, which had no red.
Those eyes which had just looked on death, stared down
on her, not unkindly, but unseeing. . . .

She spoke at last, to break the awful spell which was
winding itself round and round her, more than for any
other reason.

"Julia is dead," she said.

" I know." He took a step forward into the room, and
made a cold gesture of menace. She recoiled — then
rose and faced him.

"She died in my arms. I loved her."

He turned away. It was as if he had laid a book
aside and a leaf had been folded down. He muttered,
with a semblance of forced preoccupation with the
business of life —

"I just looked in to tell you that I am going straight
back to the theatre."

"Without any dinner?" she shrieked. Then, more
calmly —

"Well, you will have something to eat when you
come home, won't you? What time will that be?"

It was the first time in her life she had asked such a
question, and his answer to it, delivered over his
shoulder as he went downstairs, cut her to the heart.

" Perhaps never ! "

Scant consolation ! She knew that he did not mean
to kill himself — at least not yet, for he had promised to
make the arrangements for and attend Julia's funeral.



Digitized by



Google



THE MEMOIR



Digitized by



Google



Digitized by



Google



THE MEMOIR

Did women in Society ever "speak " to other women,
when a man dear to them both was concerned ?

Had such an outrageous course ever been pursued
since the days when Chriemhild "spoke" to Gudrun
in the midst of the Rhine stream ?

Little Lady Greenwell pondered this, time after time,
day after day, as she sat dressed in her ineffectual Paris
best, alone, in crowds, in sunlight gardens, lamp-lit ball-
rooms, unlit boudoirs arranged for cosy gossiping teas.
She never talked gossip, but she listened to it. A great
deal of it covertly was about herself, or rather about her
husband. That was one of the reasons why she felt
that she ought to speak — speak kindly, seriously,
effectively.

She fully meant to tell Cynthia what it was her duty
to tell her, but she could not make up her mind to take
the first plunge into unconventionality.

So, she sat about through a whole season, watching
Sir Hilary's social triumphs — she herself never
triumphed — and arranged her speech, carefully com-
posing it beforehand, rehearsing it, canvassing the
relative claims of diplomacy and frankness, fulness and
brevity, emotion or matter of fact. What arguments
should she use, and which let go? Which, having
regard to the character of Cynthia Chenies, would be
likely to affect that volatile lady most? Should she

73



Digitized by



Google



74 TALES OF THE UNEASY

plead her own years the more, her own looks the less ?
Should she take high moral grounds ?

Should she put forward the young widow's personal
expediency ? It all depended on what form of admonish-
ment Cynthia would take best.

Lady Greenwell was honest enough to admit to her-
self that she proposed to lecture Cynthia as much for
her own good, as Cynthia's. Truly, she felt that it
would be a difficult thing to keep self out of it, or as
much in the background as possible.

"Just you let my man alone ! "

That was what Kate of Wapping would have said
to Peg of Limehouse, and no more ado, but could Lady
Greenwell of Highfields, Hungerford, and 50, Carlton
House Terrace so bluntly declare herself to the Honour-
able Mrs. Chenies of Portland Place? Did well-bred
women do these things ? It seemed at once so absurdly
simple, just as you might ask some one to take his foot
off your dress and no offence, and at the same time so
appallingly impossible a thing to do. Women in
Society were not supposed to show when they were
annoyed, ask for explanations, or to "act straight."

How they suffered in consequence of these absurd
fetishes of conduct they set up, women alone knew.
Moreover, such a subject, even if it were fairly and
squarely discussed between two exceptional women,
would represent the merely primitive appeal of the one
to the other's generosity, and generosity, though per-
missible in Wapping or Limehouse is not the " thing "
in Mayfair or Portland Place.

Yet some women were really and truly generous at
heart — Cynthia was, she was sure. Had it not been for
the presence between them of this male bone of conten-
tion, Sir Hilary, Lady Greenwell would have been quite
fond of Cynthia Chenies. She did not dislike her even



Digitized by



Google



THE MEMOIR 75

now, when Cynthia was making her so uncomfortable,
and she admired her sincerely, her frocks and her style.
Hilary, did, and she could not help following suit in
this as in all else.

And, naturally, Cynthia could not help liking Hilary
and his open attentions. Who could help liking Hilary
and complying with him when he chose to flirt, and
he always did choose? He was a born flirt, and he
was eight years younger than his wife. Wives, who
were burdened with odious supernumerary years, must,
of course, give their man a little rope, and Mabel Green-
well gave hers a good deal.

Hilary Greenwell was a traveller, who came home and
wrote books about it. He danced and dashed through
a season, and then packed up and went to risk his life
on some inaccessible mountain or other. Of course,
when he came back, brown as a berry, and with sheaves
of notes and measurements, he was the rage, and women
simply "clawed him " for their parties, and adored him
for their boudoirs.

Cynthia Chenies was no exception to the rule.
Though a widow, she was little more than a girl, and
looked a mere child. At the parties she gave in her big
house, so Hilary would say, you always expected to see
the dolls set up, and find pips in the orange juice soup,
and have to mumble the "pretend " biscuit joint. Child-
like, she knew no measure in her appreciation of the
handsome traveller returned, and people were saying
now that she was making a fool of herself, and that
Lady Greenwell didn't like it.

They were wrong there, Lady Greenwell wasn't
jealous at aH. She was sure of Hilary, and would not
have insulted him by display of vulgar jealousy. The
effect of the scandal on her only amounted to discomfort.
Great discomfort she might say, and even annoyance,



Digitized by



Google



76 TALES OF THE UNEASY

and a few wet pillowed nights, loyally concealed from
Hilary. She was neither young nor beautiful : it be-
hoved her to be clever. She could, she knew, keep his
love, though she was unable to restrain those loose
tendrils of his fancy which waved airily to and fro,
catching here and there temporarily on the fair up-
standing flowers that bloomed every year in the great
parterre of London's garden of seasonal delights.
Hilary loved her and her only. She must do nothing
foolish.

Whatever she felt, whatever she said to Cynthia
Chenies, must be a secret for Sir Hilary, a matter be-
tween Cynthia and herself. Some women — fools ! —
thought little Lady Greenwell — would have rushed at
once to their husband with an appeal or a command, to
"put a stop to it at once," thus definitely estranging
the coveted man without affecting the issue in the
desired way. No, it rested with her and her alone, to
convince Cynthia of the awkwardness of the situation
created by Cynthia's careless compliance with the fancies
of the irresponsible Hilary, a situation merely irksome
to his wife, but positively injurious to his wife's friend.
Great interests on either hand were not concerned. No
one's heart was in it.

Punctuality was Lady Greenwell 's virtue — conse-
quently her husband's too. She sat on the sofa at the
Creswicks', fan in hand, handkerchief in lap. The man
who was going to take her in stood over her chair,
uttering the usual commonplaces, when the door opened
to admit one single, smiling lady — Cynthia Chenies,
late as usual, wearing the cluster of flowers she always
wore, and that every one attributed to Sir Hilary's devo-
tion. Lady Greenwell happened to know that Mrs.
Chenies ordered them at the florist's for herself. But
how could she tell people that !



Digitized by



Google



THE MEMOIR 77

She saw, what, of course, other people saw, Cynthia's
careless delicately possessive glance at Sir Hilary, a
glance that effectually singled him out, as it were, from
a group of like patterned men, clustered about the fire-
place. So stupid of Cynthia ! Nothing else, of course.
Lady Greenwell knew, as well as if she had been told,
that Betty Creswick would send the two in together.
Suppose she spoke to Betty Creswick, and asked her
not to join the tacit conspiracy that prevails in well-
regulated, pleasure-loving society, to give the woman,
whenever it is possible, to the man she is supposed to
want ? Never ! She would die sooner ! For Society
would resent such an anti-social proposal and protect
its own joys and convenience.

It must go on although it was making her miserable.
Would this wretched season never come to an end?
Not that she need expect to find any intermission of her
troubles even then ! For there would come visits,
"country-housing " up and down the length and breadth
of England and Scotland, the three would be asked con-
stantly to meet each other. She had been so nice to
Cynthia, that people all thought that Lady Greenwell
had accepted it. There would be no rest for her till
the late autumn, when Sir Hilary had agreed to go with
a party of men on an expedition to locate a continent
somewhere. He would be away for four months.

As a loving wife she ought to have dreaded this
approaching separation; she was shocked to realize
that in her heart of hearts, she was looking forward
to it. She would not see the light of his countenance,
but then, neither would the other ! Jealousy makes sad
dogs-in-the-manger of us all. And she would have the
delight of his frequent letters. That is, unless he wrote
to Cynthia too?

If only she had had a child ! Cynthia had one,



Digitized by



Google



78 TALES OF THE UNEASY

Cynthia, a widow, with no husband now to bind faster
to her side therewith ! What a pity it all was !

Dinner was announced. Sir Hilary gave Cynthia his
arm, with a certain look . . . proud . . . protecting
. . . sheepish rather. . . . Yes, she must speak.

She placed her hand lightly on the sleeve of she knew
not whom, and followed Hilary and Cynthia into the
dining-room. She was miserable, she was sure that
Hilary, had he but known how unhappy she was
making herself, would have tried at once to alter his
line of conduct. And he would have failed ! Of that,
too, she was sure. Man can do nothing in this line,
of himself alone, save by the grace of the woman who
is leading him astray. It was settled; she must speak
to Cynthia !

Cynthia Chenies, who was not lacking in perception,
realized at once the meaning of the innocently diplo-
matic, intensely special glance which Lady Greenwell,
placed exactly opposite, fixed upon her, as soon as
everybody was seated.

"Mabel Greenwell means to speak to me!"

She could harbour no other thought, from the fish
onward. She was a nervous, lazy woman, and the fear
of a "woman's row" was intensely repugnant to her.
She hated fuss about men, and bad form, and uncon-
ventionally of any kind. Her affair with Sir Hilary,
whatever it might mean to her, was openly, at least,
quite within the bounds of her world's convention, and
she deeply resented any attempt on Lady Greenwell's
part to draw it out of its limbo of self-chosen
vagueness.

To herself, she was willing to admit that she loved
Sir Hilary very well, nay, desperately. She was less
willing to admit that she suffered over this illicit attach-
ment, and yet did suffer a good deal, for she was a



Digitized by



Google



THE MEMOIR 79

good woman, and Lady Greenwell a healthy woman, so
the chances were she would never get him honestly.

She knew Sir Hilary loved her, was fond of Mabel,
and respected them both. That being the case, he
would not do either of them a wrong for the whole
world.

There it was ! What an impasse ! Three scrupul-
ously honourable people caught in a net ! No issue but
death, and she could not contemplate even Mabel's
death with equanimity. Mabel had been very kind to
her, and she and Mabel would have been the greatest
friends if Sir Hilary had not stood between them.

Though she pitied Mabel for her age, her plainness,
she could not help feeling a little angry with Mabel
for having presumed to marry Sir Hilary; she should
not have allowed Hilary to persuade her that she was a
suitable wife for him. Hilary was so plausible. Once,
however, having committed the initial error, Mabel
should not have hoped to keep him, except by courtesy.

She knew Sir Hilary well enough not to feel obliged
to talk to him, so she plodded imperturbably through
the menu, eating a good deal to justify her taciturnity.
"Oh, I am so hungry," she said once or twice, "I have
been down to Brighton to-day to see the boy ! "

Sir Hilary never worried. He quietly looked after
her, gave her her own way now as ever. She was heed-
less, he safeguarded her reputation as well as he could.
He never wrote to her when he was away; she would
have forgotten to destroy his letters. He called on her
not too often ; he dined with her now and then, generally
with his wife. There was no need to compromise her
by overt acts of this sort. The mad, bad, sympathetic
world was kind enough to cater for the indulgence of
their affection; in all the rag6uts of society were they
skilfully combined, and discreet opportunities of meeting



Digitized by



Google



80 TALES OF THE UNEASY

served up to them daily, with the result that every one
was happy and amused, except Lady Greenwell, who
had been born and bred in the country and never could
acquire London's cynical tone.

Once or twice, however, before this evening, Cynthia
had suspected some such strata of unsuspected bourgeois
feeling in Mabel. She almost wished Betty Creswick
would not be so kind to Hilary and herself, and a little:
kinder to Mabel. She sometimes even avoided dulll
parties where she knew he was going. Not so Sir
Hilary, he had no scruples of this kind. He adored
her, he told her so — "and as there's nothing wrong
about it all, why shouldn't we see as much of each other t
as people will let us ? "

"Ah, but other people " — an ellipsis for Mabel,

whom it pleased her to mention to him as little as
possible. But he understood, in his breezy, butterfly way.

"Mabel is all right. Mabel's a good sort, and under-
stands me. She isn't such a fool as to trouble about
gossip."

He never said more. It was tacitly assumed between
them that Mabel was awfully fond of him and all that,
but "demonstrations would simply bore her, you know."
Meanwhile, he loved Cynthia with every fibre of his
being — all save the domestic ones, it was understood
— she was his Egeria, his goddess, his good angel, the
woman he thought of last thing at night and the first
thing on waking, in the jungle, on the veldt, on the
frozen Himalayan slope. He was hers— hers only. No
one else cared, not even Mabel, who had "settled down."

Cynthia Chenies hardly realized it, but this passion
had come to be her life. She breathed and dressed but
for Hilary. She was a cold woman, and content with
its platonic manifestations, but she technically regretted
the immense waste exemplified in the position of the



Digitized by



Google



THE MEMOIR 81

lover, tied for all his days to two women, neither of
whom was or could be everything to him.

She caught Mabel's eye now and again full of timid
reticences and prudent punctilios, but expressing over
and above all others, the simple emotion that betrayeth
itself in speech.

" I must speak, or burst ! " the poor woman fancied
Mabel saying, and shivered over her chocolate mousse.

The moment came. Sir Hilary left soon after dinner
to attend an Ethnological Society's meeting, and Lady
Greenwell timidly offered to motor Mrs. Chenies home.
For some fateful reason or other, that lady's brougham
was not forthcoming.

" It is frightfully out of your way, Mabel ! " argued
the trapped fly.

Gently, but firmly, the spider informed her that a
mere difference of a mile and a quarter did not in the
least constitute out-of-the-wayness, and the hostess
settled it by her vague encouragements.

"So nice of you to chaperon each other like that I "

Mrs. Chenies hardly grasped the significance of Lady
Creswick's remark until the knees of Lady Greenwell
and herself were safely stowed under the same bearskin
rug.

"I wanted to speak to you, Cynthia," began Lady
Greenwell honestly, without preface or pretence.

" Did you ? " replied the other, shrinking as far away
from her companion as she could into the corner of the
motor. Then, collecting herself, she said, "You can,
you know."

"It is a little difficult for me — but then— I must
remember it is for your good, Cynthia."

"Oh, for my good! " exclaimed Mrs. Chenies, stung
by the familiar, too familiar exordium. "You must
remember I am not a mere girl — I am a widow."

G



Digitized by



Google



82 TALES OF THE UNEASY

"That is just it," continued Lady Greenwell, de-
lighted. "A young and" — with a gulp — "pretty
widow."

"Oh, don't mention it," the other begged her
flippantly.

Though her tone grated on and disturbed Lady Green-
well, that lady continued, almost apologetically —

"That is the right way to take it, dear, not seriously 1
Just a little hint, you know — laugh about it as much
as you like when I am done, but listen to me for a
minute. . . . ! Could you not contrive, dear, to see a
little less of Hilary — my husband ? "

"I know he's your husband, Mabel, well enough I "
Mrs. Chenies jerked out crossly. "And I don't see so
much of him as all that ! "

"Oh, I know, dear, I know all about your friendship
— your intimacy . . . it's nothing at all, nothing at all
. . . only you see people will talk."

"Yes, bother them!"

"We mustn't pay too much attention to gossip, of
course, but we owe it to — ourselves, to take some notice
of what is said. You may want to marry again ? "

" Never 1"

"Oh, don't say that!" pleaded the other pitifully.
"You are sure to — so young and pretty. But don't you
think, that meantime, that people should couple your
name and Hilary's is prejudicial — rather to you? Of
course, I know "

"What?"

"That there is nothing at all serious between you —
nothing at all, Hilary" — she blurted out the indecent
fact — "Hilary is devoted to me, and always has been,
he has never swerved for the fraction of an instant.
Besides, he would not "

"Would not what?"



Digitized by



Google



THE MEMOIR 83

"Oh, Cynthia, you do make it so difficult! You
seem so stony. . . . You aren't offended?"

"No, of course not, I only wanted to know what it
was Hilary wouldn't do?"

Her careless use of the beloved's name hurt Lady
Greenwell a good deal. She drew herself up —

— "Would not allow himself to make love to another
woman during his wife's lifetime. You may as well
take that for granted. Only — he is younger than I, and
heedless, and you are most attractive, while I am a piain
woman, well-dressed. And the world thinks, of course,
the usual thing ! Oh ! Cynthia, help me ! And it
would not matter, of course, if it were not for you and
your reputation, though I can't deny that it makes me
very uncomfortable to hear him lightly spoken of."

" What do you want me to do about it ? "

"I said what. See less of him. See him only at my
house."

"Will you give him your orders, then, not to call at
mine ? "

" Dear Cynthia, how could I do that ? What do you
think of me ? "

"I think you are like all women — want to get some
one else to pull the chestnuts out of the fire for you.
Why should I do your dirty work ? And it would not
do either, I couldn't forbid him my house without
creating remark, and doing exactly what you don't want
done — getting him talked about. Nor can I go and tell
Betty Creswick not to send us in to dinner together "

"Of course you can't tell her, but there are
methods "

"And I refuse to employ them, and let all the world
think I am doing it because I have a guilty conscience
or because you have been making a scene. You don't
want that surely ? "

G2



Digitized by



Google



84 TALES OF THE UNEASY

"No." She shuddered. "Then it has been no use
my speaking, practically ? And, Cynthia, you can have
no idea what it has cost me ! "

"I am truly sorry, but, indeed, dear, this sort of
carriage lecture never does any good. You can't have
straight talks to women. No woman can employ another
woman to help keep her husband for her — it really isn't
done."

"Keep my husband! But have I not been telling
you, Cynthia, all this time, that if I thought for one
moment that my husband had been unfaithful to me in
word, or thought, or deed, I would not have spoken to
anybody at all about it, I would just have died ! It
is precisely because I do believe in him "

"Then it makes it quite simple — go on believing in
him. You may," replied the other woman, drily, as the
carriage stopped at the door of her own house. "Good-
night, Mabel ! Thank you for the lift."

"And are you cross, Cynthia? Believe me, I meant
well."

"You meant well by yourself, eh, dear? Just realize
that you were speaking for yourself "

"Oh, Cynthia, you are cruel."

"Yes, but honest. Think it over. Let it all be as if
it hadn't been. Shall I kiss you?" She paused, with
a light foot on the step.

"Yes, please. You know I am really fond of you,
Cynthia, but you seem to have beaten me."

"Oh, no!" asseverated Mrs. Chenies, "only con-
vinced you that these sort of things can't be done."

They kissed.

"I had doubts about the wisdom of it at the time,"
murmured Lady Greenwell. "I thought you might say
it was tactless. Hilary says I have no tact."



Digitized by



Google



THE MEMOIR 85

"Never mind, you are sure he loves you, and that's
better than tact — that's everything ! "

Mrs. Chenies was shaking out her skirts on the pave-
ment, pulling out her latch key. . . .

"So that's all right. There's an end of it "

"Yes, and come to dinner to-morrow night, will
you?"

"Yes, dear. Good-night ! "

Two hands met and clasped over the window-bar of

the carriage. Lady Green well watched her friend in,

and whirled away. Mrs. Chenies rushed impulsively

upstairs to her room, and threw herself on her bed in

an agony of weeping. They were tears both for herself

and Mabel.

• ••••• .

It was a year later. Mrs. Chenies in modified mourn-
ing — for she had made herself as black as she dared —
rang for admittance at the door of Greenwell House. The
very house seemed in mourning. It used to be furnished
exotically, with variegated hangings and things Hilary
had brought back from abroad. Cynthia shivered. She
had been sent for. Why? Why did Mabel Green-
well want to see her? The cords of their friend-
ship had been sensibly loosened. It was perhaps
as well. They mourned in their separate corners — of
London.

She was ushered into the presence of a little woman
whose deep official weeds seemed almost to obliterate
her slight frame and make her fade into the surrounding
blackness. She rushed at and clung to her handsome
visitor, and kissed her mournfully and deliberately on
both cheeks.

"Dear, dear Cynthia, how good of you to come to
me!"



Digitized by



Google



86 TALES OF THE UNEASY

"Dearest Mabel, how good of you to be willing to
see me ! "

" Oh, I wanted you — somehow — so much ! I believe,
when all is said and done, Cynthia, I am fonder of you
than I am of any one ! "

Mrs. Chenies winced and suffered herself to be kissed
again on both cheeks. She looked extremely handsome
in her glowing purples and blues. The widow's in-
expressive eyes were merely dimmed and bleared by
her tears, those of Cynthia Chenies shone, and she was
not so silly as to redden the lids by dabbing them with
a handkerchief, as Lady Green well did.

"He was so fond of you, Cynthia! He has left you
to me as a sort of legacy. We often spoke of you."

Cynthia started. It had surely been a tacit conven-
tion between herself and the dead Hilary, that —

"Yes, I ventured at last to tell him about that talk
I had with you once, and he took it just as you did. He
laughed at me and said that I had no right to worry
you with that sort of thing and that you were perfectly
justified in being ' short ' with me, as you were, Cynthia,
you know. He thought it very nice of you to forgive
me and go on seeing us as usual."

"Yes, yes, but I saw very little of him alone after
that."

"He went away so soon after, didn't he? That was
perhaps a good thing — it gave one time "

"I don't think you had any need to tell him."

"Oh, my dear, what could it matter? There was such
perfect confidence between us, and I preferred that a
trifling incident like that should not be allowed to inter-
fere with it. Surely you don't mind?"

" Not now ! " replied Cynthia Chenies, with an effort.
"And I suppose you had a perfect right to do as you
liked about it."



Digitized by



Google



THE MEMOIR 87

"That's all right then. And Hilary said — dear thing !
— when he left me to go on that wretched expedition
that killed him, that I was to be as nice to you as I
could, and see as much of you as you would allow me
to do, and so I have, and so I mean to."

"Don't, don't cry so, dear ! "

"Oh, do let me cry — it helps me! And how can I
help it, when I think of the dearest husband ever woman
had, lost to me, gone — gone — killed, out there alone,
among horrid savages. . . . Why, Cynthia, you are
crying too ! "

"I can't help it either," said the other savagely, dis-
daining to wipe her tears away.

"Cynthia, you were fond of him, too — now don't say
you were not ! "

"I was."

Lady Greenwell rose. She looked taller. She looked
grim.

"And that is the reason I thought — I made up my
mind that you were the proper person to consult about
this. . . ."

"This?" asked the other, following the direction of
those sad sunken eyes.

"Yes! It was his last wish, Cynthia!" Lady
Greenwell pointed to a large bulging packet lying, with
a magnificent despatch box, close to her elbow, and
continued, in her thin, nervous, passionate voice —

"You know, when he got ill over there — it came on
so gradually — he never ceased writing to me till the
very last — he got his secretary to send home the MS. of
his new book to me. He wanted me to see to the
publication of it. I was to edit it, if he never came back
to do it himself — and I was to ask you to be co-editress."

"Good God!"

"Oh, don't be frightened, dear, there is nothing to do,



Digitized by



Google



88 TALES OF THE UNEASY

it is all done. I did it, only, as he said you were to
see it, before it came out, I could not but prepare to
carry out his dear wishes. And now I must tell you, as
he is gone, I should like to call it Memorials of a Noble
Soul, something like that, and add some of his letters
to me. I have them all here, in this despatch box,
I never destroyed a single line of dear darling
Hilary's "

"They will make a most interesting book ! " mur-
mured Mrs. Chenies, looking away.

"Yes, won't they, only, of course," Lady Greenwell
breathed softly, with a watery smile of triumph, "they
will want some editing. They are too intimate, too
personal for the ear of the general public. It could not
be otherwise. But, still, I don't think the public should
lose because he was in love with his wife, do you ? "

"No, certainly not."

"There is a great deal in them of purely general in-
terest, of course, but it still wants weeding of lover's
phrases and endearments and so on. So I thought the
best plan would be for me to read them all aloud to you,
and consult you as to what is to be left in, or struck out,"

Cynthia Chenies groaned aloud. Lady Greenwell
smiled. She had gained confidence.

" Cynthia, dear, how like you ! You were always
afraid of hard work, and there is nothing — nothing bores
you so much as listening. Hilary noticed that. ' These
brilliant women ! ' he used to say."

"Let's have the letters," ejaculated Mrs. Chenies
bluffly. She adjusted a cushion or two behind her
shoulders. "I have learnt how to listen lately. Let's
have tea first."

"Certainly!" Lady Greenwell rang the bell. Tea
was brought. The hostess dispensed it. Then, with
many a reminiscent pause, and sob and dab of the hand-



Digitized by



Google



THE MEMOIR 89

kerchief, Lady Greenwell opened the despatch box, and
produced letters tied up in blue, Hilary's favourite
colour. It was the colour of Cynthia's eyes. She
fidgeted in her place, and Lady Greenwell offered her
another cushion — "because this will all take time."

"I'll read the first that comes," the widow of Hilary
declared, when they had both settled down. "I am not
afraid of your knowing, Cynthia, how fond he was of me.
This one begins — he generally begins so — * Dear little
woman ' — we can leave that out if you like ? "

"You can't. It shows character," observed Mrs.
Chenies sombrely. "Go on."

Thus encouraged, Lady Greenwell read, shyly at first,
but with gathering confidence, as the map of her hus-
band's affection unrolled itself under her faltering
tongue. She read faster. The session was going to last
interminably, the letters were good, but long !

"Vefy vivid! Most interesting!" Mrs. Chenies
remarked now and again, drumming with her foot, and
with her face turned away.

" It is really rather too intimate ! " Lady Greenwell
blurted out. "Listen to this — 'Darling, my darling.'
I can scarcely bear to read it. ' All night I lie and toss
on my uncomfortable rugs, and think — think of you,
darling, and your soft breast I ' "

"You might put ' cheek ' there, instead of ' breast,' if
you liked?" interposed the co-editress hastily. Lady
Greenwell looked up.

"Very well." She used a little pencil at her girdle.
Then she resumed —

" ' And I realize how the thought of one sweet woman
at home, can be at once the joy and the torture of the
traveller. For I don't know if it is most sweet or most
bitter, this remembrance of happier hours in altered
circumstances, It is joy, but then, sometimes the agony



Digitized by



Google



90 TALES OF THE UNEASY

of separation is too keen to bear. . . .' Oh, that he should
feel it so ! I'll go on, Cynthia, if you don't feel too much
bored. ' / stretch out my hands, I look for you, for
your warm kind arms ' "

"You certainly will have to strike all those rhapsodies
out," Mrs. Chenies remarked coldly. "He must have
been very ill then. Are the letters all like that? If so,
they won't made a book of very general interest."

"Ah ! " Lady Greenwell exclaimed. She was tossing
over the letters feverishly. "They seem to have got
mixed ! This is one of the English series — written from
the Creswicks' place. That must have been sent the
summer before he went, for that's the only time he ever
went to Betty Creswick's alone. It was the very week
I spoke to you, Cynthia."

"I wish you would not keep on bringing that in,"
interposed Cynthia Chenies irritably, "you were quite
right, and I was quite wrong, I see that well enough,
now. Go on. We are both dining out to-night, I
suppose ? "

"Not I," said Lady Greenwell haughtily. "I shall
never dine out again." She read on a little to herself.
"He didn't like being there without me a bit," she
murmured. "In fact, he loathed it."

"Why didn't you go with him, then?" asked Mrs.
Chenies, though she knew well enough. She had been
one of the Creswick party, and the letter explaining
Mabel's reasons for defection had been read aloud to
her. But Lady Greenwell couldn't know that.

"Oh, I got a bad chill at the very last moment, and
had to wire I couldn't go, Cynthia, shall I read this
letter?"

"Of course. It's part of his life, I suppose."

"'My own little brown bird y y " read Lady Greenwell
softly, " * J was so grieved to leave you, tucked up in bed,



Digitized by



Google



THE MEMOIR 91

a darkened room and with only a hired nurse to hold your
little hot hand. Here I may say I am not enjoying my-
self a bit, and yet we are a very gay party and everything
jolly. But I can't get any fun out of it without you to
talk it over with me, after we've gone to bed at four in
the morning. Dear little woman, why did you make me
go alone ? The Creswick menage is a bit noisy for your
quiet sober husband. One gets a little tired of the
society of brilliant women — they flash and coruscate —
and finally weary. I can't help thinking of a certain
still small brown bird at home sitting on the bough, and
waiting for me.' Oh, Cynthia, I do believe, here is
something actually about you — he mentions you by



"I'm the brilliant woman that wearies, am I not?
Well, let us hear what he says about me."

"Shall I? I've read them all a hundred times, but
I don't quite remember, so if it annoys you, mind, it is
your own fault. Here goes ! ' The Cynthia of the
Minute is really a little overpowering. She seems quite
to enjoy saying risque things and compromising her-
self. . . .' I really don't think I ought to read this to
you, Cynthia?"

"Read it or I shall snatch it out of your hands."

"Well, you are sure you won't mind? 'Poor little
Cynthia, she is astonishingly indiscreet, but she means
no harm. She is a dear, nice, ordinary simple woman,
pretending to be a sad rake, but as good as gold,
really ' "

" As good as gold, really ! "

"Well, isn't that nice for him to say that! Poor
dear boy, he always did go straight to the heart of the
matter, didn't he? He was, as a matter of fact, awfully
fond of you, and this just shows it. He knew you
through and through — though. What's the matter ? "



Digitized by



Google



92 TALES OF THE UNEASY

"Give me some hot water to drink," gasped Mrs.
Chenies. " Is — this your revenge, Mabel ? "

"Dear Cynthia, aren't you well? You do use such
odd stagey words. Revenge ! I am your friend and
always will be. My husband wanted us to be friends."

"Well, then, do let us keep friends," said Mrs.
Chenies, drinking her scalding hot water hastily and
rising. "I must go. An early dinner for the theatre.
. . . Tommy Vavasor. . . ."

"But what about the letters? I have only read two."

"Of course, you must leave that out about me," said
Cynthia, speaking very fast and knotting her fur round
her neck as if she wanted to throttle herself, "and all
personalities about people still living. And you must
not print names. But, as for the rest, I should give the
letters in their entirety. Go ahead, that's my advice to
you. You can hurt none, and your collaborator gives
you carte blanche."

She escaped. She preserved no memory of the pas-
sage from Lady Greenwell's dull drawing-room to the
gas-lit street outside. She bitterly resented the dead
man's view of her innocent attempts at disillusioning
him, on the only occasion they had met previously
to his departure and after his wife's lecture, and she
would have given her best jewel to discover whether
Mabel's quite thorough revenge had been carefully
planned or not ?

She married young Lord Vavasor within the year, and
contrived, without exciting any suspicion, never again
to be alone in the same room with the widowed Lady
Greenwell again. But she longed as she had never
longed for anything else, to hear of Lady Greenwell's
remarriage.



Digitized by



Google



THE PRAYER



Digitized by



Google



Digitized by



Google



THE PRAYER



" // is but giving over of a game,
That must be lost."— Philaster.

"Come, Mrs. Arne — come, my dear, you must not
give way like this ! You can't stand it — you really
can't ! Let Miss Kate take you away — now do ! " urged
the nurse, with her most motherly of intonations.

"Yes, Alice, Mrs. Joyce is right. Come away — do
come away — you are only making yourself ill. It is all
over ; you can do nothing ! Oh, oh, do come away ! "
implored Mrs. Arne's sister, shivering with excitement
and nervousness.

A few moments ago Dr. Graham had relinquished his
hold on the pulse of Edward Arne with the hopeless
movement of the eyebrows that meant — the end.

The nurse had made the little gesture of resignation
that was possibly a matter of form with her. The young
sister-in-law had hidden her face in her hands. The wife
had screamed a scream that had turned them all hot and
cold — and flung herself on the bed over her dead hus-
band. There she lay; her cries were terrible, her sobs
shook her whole body.

The three gazed at her pityingly, not knowing what
to do next. The nurse, folding her hands, looked
towards the doctor for directions, and the doctor
drummed with his fingers on the bed-post. The young

95



Digitized by



Google



96 TALES OF THE UNEASY

girl timidly stroked the shoulder that heaved and writhed
under her touch.

" Go away I Go away ! " her sister reiterated continu-
ally, in a voice hoarse with fatigue and passion.

"Leave her alone, Miss Kate," whispered the nurse
at last; "she will work it off best herself, perhaps."

She turned down the lamp, as if to draw a veil over
the scene. Mrs. Arne raised herself on her elbow, show-
ing a face stained with tears and purple with emotion.

"What ! Not gone?" she said harshly. "Go away,
Kate, go away ! It is my house. I don't want you, I
want no. one — I want to speak to my husband. Will you
go away — all of you. Give me an hour, half-an-hour —
five minutes I "

She stretched out her arms imploringly to the doctor.

"Well . . ." said he, almost to himself.

He signed to the two women to withdraw, and fol-
lowed them out into the passage. "Go and get some-
thing to eat," he said peremptorily, "while you can.
We shall have trouble with her presently. I'll wait
in the dressing-room."

He glanced at the twisting figure on the bed, shrugged
his shoulders, and passed into the adjoining room, with-
out, however, closing the door of communication. Sit-
ting down in an arm-chair drawn up to the fire, he
stretched himself and closed his eyes. The professional
aspects of the case of Edward Arne rose up before him in
all its interesting forms of complication. . . .

It was just this professional attitude that Mrs. Arne
unconsciously resented both in the doctor and in the
nurse. Through all their kindness she had realized and
resented their scientific interest in her husband, for to
them he had been no more than a curious and compli-



Digitized by



Google



THE PRAYER 97

>cated case; and now that the blow had fallen, she
regarded them Both in the light of executioners. Her
one desire, expressed with all the shameless sincerity of
blind and thoughtless misery, was to be free of their
hateful presence and alone — alone with her dead I

She was weary of the doctor's subdued manly tones —
of the nurse's commonplace motherliness, too habitually
adapted to the needs of all to be appreciated by the
individual — of the childish consolation of the young
sister, who had never loved, never been married, did not
know what sorrow was ! Their expressions of sympathy
struck her like blows, the touch of their hands on her
body, as they tried to raise her, stung her in every nerve.

With a sigh of relief she buried her head in the pillow,
pressed her body more closely against that of her hus-
band, and lay motionless.

Her sobs ceased.

The lamp went out with a gurgle. The fire leaped up,
and died. She raised her head and stared about her
helplessly, then sinking down again she put her lips to
the ear of the dead man.

"Edward — dear Edward ! " she whispered, "why have
you left me? Darling, why have you left me? J can't
stay behind — you know I can't. I am too young to be
left. It is only a year since you married me. I never
thought it was only for a year. ' Till death us do part ! '
Yes, I know that's in it, but nobody ever thinks of that !
I never thought of living without you ! I meant to die
with you. . . .

"No — no — I can't die — I must not — till my baby is
born. You will never see it. Don't you want to see it?
Don't you ? Oh, Edward, speak ! Say something,
darling, one word — one little word ! Edward ! Edward I



Digitized by



Google



98 TALES OF THE UNEASY

are you there? Answer me for God's sake, answer
me!

" Darling, I am so tired of waiting. Oh, think, dear-
est. There is so little time. They only gave me half-an-
hour. In half-an-hour they will come and take you away
from me — take you where I can't come to you — with all
my love I can't come to you I I know the place — I saw
it once. A great lonely place full of graves, and little
stunted trees dripping with dirty London rain . . . and
gas-lamps flaring all round . . . but quite, quite dark
where the grave is ... a long grey stone just like the
rest. How could you stay there ? — all alone — all alone —
without me?

"Do you remember, Edward, what we once said —
that whichever of us died first should come back to watch
over the other, in the spirit? I promised you, and you
promised me. What children we were ! Death is not
what we thought. It comforted us to say that then.

"Now, it's nothing — nothing — worse than nothing!
I don't want your spirit — I can't see it — or feel it — I
want you, you, your eyes that looked at me, your mouth
that kissed me "

She raised his arms and clasped them round her neck,
and lay there very still, murmuring, "Oh, hold me,
hold me I Love me if you can. Am I hateful ? This is
me ! These are your arms. . . ."

The doctor in the next room moved in his chair. The
noise awoke her from her dream of contentment, and
she unwound the dead arm from her neck, and, holding
it up by the wrist, considered it ruefully.

"Yes, I can put it round me, but I have to hold it
there. It is quite cold — it doesn't care. Ah, my dear,
you don't care ! You are dead. I kiss you, but you
don't kiss me. Edward ! Edward ! Oh, for heaven's
sake kiss me once. Just once !



Digitized by



Google



THE PRAYER 99

"No, no, that won't do— that's not enough! that's
nothing ! worse than nothing ! I want you back, you,
all you. . . . What shall I do? ... I often pray, . • .
Oh, if there be a God in heaven, and if He ever answered
a prayer, let Him answer mine — my only prayer. I'll
never ask another — and give you back to me ! As you
were — as I loved you— as I adored you ! He must listen.
He must 1 My God, my God, he's mine — he's my hus-
band, he's my lover — give him back to me ! "

• ••••••

— "Left alone for half-an-hour or more with the
corpse ! It's not right ! "

The muttered expression of the nurse's revolted sense
of professional decency came from the head of the stair-
case, where she had been waiting for the last few
minutes. The doctor joined her.

"Hush, Mrs. Joyce ! I'll go to her now."

The door creaked on its hinges as he gently pushed it
open and went in.

"What's that? What's that?" screamed Mrs. Arne.
"Doctor! Doctor! Don't touch me! Either I am
dead or he is alive ! "

"Do you want to kill yourself, Mrs. Arne?" said Dr.
Graham, with calculated sternness, coming forward;
"come away!"

"Not dead ! Not dead ! " she murmured.

"He is dead, I assure you. Dead and cold an hour
ago ! Feel ! " He took hold of her, as she lay face
downwards, and in so doing he touched the dead man's
cheek — it was not cold ! Instinctively his finger sought
a pulse.

"Stop! Wait!" he cried in his intense excitement.
"My dear Mrs. Arne, control yourself! "

But Mrs. Arne had fainted, and fallen heavily off the
bed on the other sfde. Her sister, hastily summoned,

H2



Digitized by



Google



ioo TALES OF THE UNEASY

attended to her, while the man they had all given over
for dead was, with faint gasps and sighs and reluctant
moans, pulled, as it were, hustled and dragged back
over the threshold of life.



II

" Why do you always wear black, Alice ? " asked
Esther Graham, "You are not in mourning that I
know of."

She was Dr. Graham's only daughter and Mrs. Arne's
only friend. She sat with Mrs. Arne in the dreary
drawing-room of the house in Chelsea. She had come to
tea. She was the only person who ever did come to
tea there.

She was brusque, kind, and blunt, and had a talent
for making inappropriate remarks. Six years ago Mrs.
Arne had been a widow for an hour ! Her husband had
succumbed to an apparently mortal illness, and for the
space of an hour had lain dead. When suddenly and
inexplicably he had revived from his trance, the shock,
combined with six weeks' nursing, had nearly killed his
wife. All this Esther had heard from her father. She
herself had only come to know Mrs. Arne after her child
was born, and all the tragic circumstances of her hus-
band's illness put aside, and it was hoped forgotten.
And when her idle question received no answer from
the pale absent woman who sat opposite, with listless
lack-lustre eyes fixed on the green and blue flames
dancing in the fire, she hoped it had passed unnoticed.
She waited for five minutes for Mrs. Arne to resume the
conversation, then her natural impatience got the better
of her.

" Do say something, Alice ! " she implored.



Digitized by



Google



THE PRAYER 101

"Esther, I beg your pardon!" said Mrs. Arne. "I
was thinking."

" What were you thinking of ? "

"I don't know."

"No, of course you don't. People who sit and stare
into the fire never do think, really. They are only
brooding and making themselves ill, and that is what
you are doing. You mope, you take no interest in any-
thing, you never go out — I am sure you have not been
out of doors to-day ? "

"No — yes — I believe not. It is so cold."

"You are sure to feel the cold if you sit in the house
all day, and sure to get ill ! Just look at yourself ! "

Mrs. Arne rose and looked at herself in the Italian
mirror over the chimney-piece. It reflected faithfully
enough her even pallor, her dark hair and eyes, the
sweeping length of her eyelashes, the sharp curves of her
nostrils, and the delicate arch of her eyebrows, that
formed a thin sharp black line, so clear as to seem
almost unnatural.

"Yes, I do look ill," she said with conviction.

" No wonder. You choose to bury yourself alive."

"Sometimes I do feel as if I lived in a grave. I look
up at the ceiling and fancy it is my coffin-lid."

"Don't please talk like that!" expostulated Miss
Graham, pointing to Mrs. Arne's little girl. "If only
for Dolly's sake, I think you should not give way to
such morbid fancies. It isn't good for her to see you
like this always."

"Oh, Esther," the other exclaimed, stung into some-
thing like vivacity, "don't reproach me I I hope I am
a good mother to my child ! "

"Yes, dear, you are a model mother — and model wife
too. Father says the way you look after your husband
is something wonderful, but don't you think for your



Digitized by



Google



102 TALES OF THE UNEASY

own sake you might try to be a little gayer? You
encourage these moods, don't you? What is it? Is it
the house ? "

She glanced around her — at the high ceiling, at the
heavy damask portieres, the tall cabinets of china, the
dim oak panelling — it reminded her of a neglected
museum. Her eye travelled into the farthest corners,
where the faint filmy dusk was already gathering, lit
only by the bewildering cross-lights of the glass panels
of cabinet doors — to the tall narrow windows — then back
again to the woman in her mourning dress, cowering by
the fire. She said sharply —

"You should go out more."

" I do not like to — leave my husband."

"Oh, I know that he is delicate and all that, but still,
does he never permit you to leave him ? Does he never
go out by himself ? "

"Not often!"

"And you have no pets! It is very odd of you. I
simply can't imagine a house without animals I "

"We did have a dog once," answered Mrs. Arne
plaintively, "but it howled so we had to give it away.
It would not go near Edward. . . . But please don't
imagine that I am dull I I have my child." She laid
her hand on the flaxen head at her knee.

Miss Graham rose, frowning.

"Ah, you are too bad!" she exclaimed. "You are
like a widow exactly, with one child, stroking its orphan
head and saying, ' Poor fatherless darling.' "

Voices were heard outside. Miss Graham stopped
talking quite suddenly, and sought her veil and gloves
on the mantelpiece.

"You need not go, Esther," said Mrs. Arne. "It is
only my husband."



Digitized by



Google



THE PRAYER 103

"Oh, but it is getting late," said the other, crumpling
up her gloves in her muff, and shuffling her feet
nervously.

"Come! " said her hostess, with a bitter smile, "put
your gloves on properly — if you must go — but it is quite
early still."

"Please don't go, Miss Graham," put in the child.

"I must. Go and meet your papa, like a good girl."

"I don't want to."

"You mustn't talk like that, Dolly," said the doctor's
daughter absently, still looking towards the door. Mrs.
Arne rose and fastened the clasps of the big fur-cloak
for her friend. The wife's white, sad, oppressed face
came very close to the girl's cheerful one, as she mur-
mured in a low voice —

"You don't like my husband, Esther? I can't help
noticing it. Why don't you ? "

" Nonsense ! " retorted the other, with the emphasis of
one who is repelling an overtrue accusation. "I do,
only -"

"Only what?"

" Well, dear, it is foolish of me, of course, but I am —
a little afraid of him."

"Afraid of Edward!" said his wife slowly. "Why
should you be ? "

"Well, dear — you see — I — I suppose women can't help
being a little afraid of their friends' husbands — they can
spoil their friendships with their wives in a moment, if
they choose to disapprove of them. I really must go !
Good-bye, child; give me a kiss! Don't ring, Alice.
Please don't I I can open the door for myself "

"Why should you ? " said Mrs. Arne. "Edward is in
the hall ; I heard him speaking to Foster."

"No; he has gone into his study. Good-bye, you



Digitized by



Google



104 TALES OF THE UNEASY

apathetic creature I " She gave Mrs. Arne a brief kiss
and dashed out of the room. The voices outside had
ceased, and she had reasonable hopes of reaching the
door without being intercepted by Mrs. Arne's husband.
But he met her on the stairs. Mrs. Arne, listening
intently from her seat by the fire, heard her exchange a
few shy sentences with him, the sound of which died
away as they went downstairs together. A few moments
after, Edward Arne came into the room and dropped into
the chair just vacated by his wife's visitor.

He crossed his legs and said nothing. Neither did she.

His nearness had the effect of making the woman look
at once several years older. Where she was pale he was
well-coloured; the network of little filmy wrinkles that,
on a close inspection, covered her face, had no parallel
on his smooth skin. He was handsome; soft, well-
groomed flakes of auburn hair lay over his forehead, and
his steely blue eyes shone equably, a contrast to the
sombre fire of hers, and the masses of dark crinkly hair
that shaded her brow. The deep lines of permanent dis-
content furrowed that brow as she sat with her chin
propped on her hands, and her elbows resting on her
knees. Neither spoke. When the hands of the clock
over Mrs. Arne's head pointed to seven, the whiter
aproned figure of the nurse appeared in the doorway,
and the little girl rose and kissed her mother very
tenderly.

Mrs. Arne's forehead contracted. Looking uneasily
at her husband, she said to the child tentatively, yet
boldly, as one grasps a nettle, "Say good-night to your
father ! "

The child obeyed, saying, "Good-night" indifferently
in her father's direction.

"Kiss him !"



Digitized by



Google



THE PRAYER 105

"No, please — please not."

Her mother looked down on her curiously, sadly. . . .

"You are a naughty, spoilt child!" she said, but
without conviction. "Excuse her, Edward."

He did not seem to have heard.

"Well, if you don't care " said his wife bitterly.

"Come, child 1 " She caught the little girl by the hand
and left the room.

At the door she half turned and looked fixedly at her
husband. It was a strange ambiguous gaze ; in it passion
and dislike were strangely combined. Then she shivered
arid closed the door softly after her.

The man in the arm-chair sat with no perceptible
change of attitude, his unspeculative eyes fixed on the
fire, his hands clasped idly in front of him. The pose
was obviously habitual. The servant brought lights and
closed the shutters, drew the curtains, and made up the
fire noisily, without, however, eliciting any reproof from
his master.

Edward Arne was an ideal master, as far as Foster was
concerned. He kept cases of cigars, but never smoked
them, although the supply had often to be renewed. He
did not care what he ate or drank, although he kept as
good a cellar as most gentlemen — Foster knew that. He
never interfered, he counted for nothing, he gave no
trouble. Foster had no intention of ever leaving such
an easy place. True, his master was not cordial ; he very
seldom addressed him or seemed to know whether he was
there, but then neither did he grumble if the fire in the
study was allowed to go out, or interfere with Foster's
liberty in any way. He had a better place of it than
Annette, Mrs. Arne's maid, who would be called up in
the middle of the night to bathe her mistress's forehead
with eau-de-Cologne, or made to brush her long hair for



Digitized by



Google



106 TALES OF THE UNEASY

hours together to soothe Ijer. Naturally enough Foster
and Annette compared notes as to their respective situa-
tions, and drew unflattering parallels between this
capricious wife and model husband.



III

Miss Graham was not a demonstrative woman. On
her return home she somewhat startled her father, as he
sat by his study table, deeply interested in his diagnosis
book, by the sudden violence of her embrace.

"Why this excitement?" he asked, smiling and turn-
ing round. He was a young-looking man for his age ;
his thin wiry figure and clear colour belied the evidence
on his hair, tinged with grey, and the tired wrinkles that
gave value to the acuteness and brilliancy of the eyes
they surrounded.

"I don't know ! " she replied, "only you are so nice
and alive somehow. I always feel like this when I come
back from seeing the Ames."

"Then don't go to see the Arnes."

"I'm so fond of her, father, and she will never come
here to me, as you know. Or else nothing would induce
me to enter her tomb of a house, and talk to that walking
funeral of a husband of hers. I managed to get away
to-day without having to shake hands with him. I always
try to avoid it. But, father, I do wish you would go and
see Alice,"

"Is she ill?"

"Well, not exactly ill, I suppose, but her eyes make
me quite uncomfortable, and she says such odd things !
I don't know if it is you or the clergyman she wants, but
she is all wrong somehow ! She never goes out except
to church ; she never pays a call, or has any one to call



Digitized by



Google



THE PRAYER 107

on her I Nobody ever asks th$ Ames to dinner, and I'm
sure I don't blame them — the sight of that man at one's
table would spoil any party — and they never entertain.
She is always alone. Day after day I go in and find her
sitting over the fire, with that same brooding expression.
I shouldn't be surprised in the least if she were to go mad
some day. Father, what is it ? What is the tragedy of
the house? There is one I am convinced. And yet,
though I have been the intimate friend of that woman
for years, I know no more about her than the man in
the street."

"She keeps her skeleton safe in the cupboard," said
Dr. Graham. "I respect her for that. And please don't
talk nonsense about tragedies. Alice Arne is only morbid
— the malady of the age. And she is a very religious
woman."

"I wonder if she complains of her odious husband to
Mr. Bligh. She is always going to his services."

"Odious?"

"Yes, odious 1 " Miss Graham shuddered. "I cannot
stand him ! I cannot bear the touch of his cold froggy
hands, and the sight of his fishy eyes ! That inane smile
of his simply makes me shrivel up. Father, honestly, do
you like him yourself ? "

" My dear, I hardly know him ! It is his wife I have
known ever since she was a child, and I a boy at college.
Her father was my tutor. I never knew her husband till
six years ago, when she called me in to attend him in a
very serious illness. I suppose she never speaks of it?
No ? A very odd affair. For the life of me I cannot tell
how he managed to recover. You needn't tell people, for
it affects my reputation, but I didn't save him ! Indeed
I have never been able to account for it. The man was
given over for dead ! "



Digitized by



Google



108 TALES OF THE UNEASY

"He might as well be dead for all the good he is,"
said Esther scornfully. "I have never heard him say
more than a couple of sentences in my life."

"Yet he was an exceedingly brilliant young man ; one
of the best men of his year at Oxford — a good deal run
after — poor Alice was wild to marry him 1 "

"In love with that spiritless creature? He is like a
house with some one dead in it, and all the blinds down ! "

"Come, Esther, don't be morbid — not to say silly!
You are very hard on the poor man 1 What's wrong
with him ? He is the ordinary, commonplace, cold-
blooded specimen of humanity, a little stupid, a little
selfish, — people who have gone through a serious illness
like that are apt to be — but on the whole, a good husband,
a good father, a good citizen "

" Yes, and his wife is afraid of him, and his child hates
him I " exclaimed Esther.

"Nonsense ! " said Dr. Graham sharply. "The child
is spoilt. Only children are apt to be — and the mother
wants a change or a tonic of some kind. I'll go and talk
to her when I have time. Go along and dress. Have
you forgotten that George Graham is coming to dinner ? "

After she had gone the doctor made a note on the
corner of his blotting-pad, "Mem. : to go and see Mrs.
Arne," and dismissed the subject of the memorandum
entirely from his mind.

• •.....

George Graham was the doctor's nephew, a tall, weedy,
cumbrous young man, full of fads and fallacies, with a
gentle manner that somehow inspired confidence. He
was several years younger than Esther, who loved to
listen to his semi-scientific, semi-romantic stories of
things met with in the course of his profession. "Oh, I
come across very queer things ! " he would say mysteri-
ously, "There's a queer little widow — — ! "



Digitized by



Google



THE PRAYER 109

"Tell me about your little widow? " asked Esther that
day after dinner, when, her father having gone back to
his study, she and her cousin sat together as usual.

He laughed.

"You like to hear of my professional experiences?
Well, she certainly interested me," he said thoughtfully.
"She is an odd psychological study in her way. I wish
I could come across her again."

"Where did you come across her, and what is her
name ? "

"I don't know her name, I don't want to; she is not a
personage to me, only a case. I hardly know her face
even. I have never seen it except in the twilight. But I
gathered that she lived somewhere in Chelsea, for she
came out on to the Embankment with only a kind of
lacy thing over her head; she can't live far off, I fancy."

Esther became instantly attentive. "Go on," she said.

"It was three weeks ago," said George Graham. "I
was coming along the Embankment about ten o'clpck. I
walked through that little grove, you know, just between
Cheyne Walk and the river, and I heard in there some
one sobbing very bitterly. I looked and saw a woman
sitting on a seat, with her head in her hands, crying. I
was most awfully sorry, of course, and I thought I could
perhaps do something for her, get her a glass of water,
or salts, or something. I took her for a woman of the
people — it was quite dark, you know. So I asked her
very politely if I could do anything for her, and then I
noticed her hands — they were quite white and covered
with diamonds."

"You were sorry you spoke, I suppose," said Esther.

" She raised her head and said — I believe she laughed —
' Are you going to tell me to move on ? * "

" She thought you were a policeman ? "

"Probably — if she thought at all — but she was in a



Digitized by



Google



no TALES OF THE UNEASY

semi-dazed condition. I told her to wait till I came back,
and dashed round the corner to the chemist's and bought
a bottle of salts. She thanked me, and made a little
effort to rise and go away. She seemed very weak. I
told her I was a medical man, I started in and talked*
to her."

"And she to you?"

"Yes, quite straight. Don't you know that women
always treat a doctor as if he were one step removed
from their father confessor — not human — not in the same
category as themselves ? It is not complimentary to one
as a man, but one hears a good deal one would not other-
wise hear. She ended by telling me all about herself — in
a veiled way, of course. It soothed her — relieved her —
§he seemed not to have had an outlet for years ! "

"To a mere stranger ! "

"To a doctor. And she did not know what she was
saying half the time. She was hysterical, of course.
Heavens ! what nonsense she talked I She spoke of her-
self as a person somehow haunted, cursed by some malign
fate, a victim of some fearful spiritual catastrophe, don't
you know ? I let her run on. She was convinced of the
reality pf a sort of ' doom ' that she had fancied had
befallen her. It was quite pathetic. Then it got rather
chilly — she shivered — I suggested her going in. She
shrank back ; she said, * If you only knew what a relief
it is, how much less miserable I am out here! I can
breathe ; I can live — it is my only glimpse of the world
that is alive — I live in a grave — oh, let me stay ! ' She
seemed positively afraid to go home."

"Perhaps some one bullied her at home."

"I suppose so, but then — she had no husband. He
died, she told me, years ago. She had adored him, she
said "

"Is she pretty?"

Digitized by LiOO? IC



THE PRAYER hi

" Pretty ! Well, I hardly noticed. Let me see ! Oh,
yes, I suppose she was pretty — no, now I think of it, she
would be too worn and faded to be what you call pretty."

Esther smiled.
* " Well, we sat there together for quite an hour, then the
clock of Chelsea church struck eleven, and she got up
and said ' Good-bye,' holding out her hand quite natur-
ally, as if our meeting and conversation had been nothing
out of the common. There was a sound like a dead leaf
trailing across the walk and she was gone."

"Didn't you ask if you should see her again ? "

"That would have been a mean advantage to take."

"You might have offered to see her home."

"I saw she did not mean me to."

"She was a lady, you say," pondered Esther. "How
was she dressed ? "

"Oh, all right, like a lady — in black — mourning, I
suppose. She has dark crinkly hair, and her eyebrows
are very thin and arched — I noticed that in the dusk."

"Does this photograph remind you of her?" asked
Esther suddenly, taking him to the mantelpiece.

"Rather!"

"Alice 1 Oh, it couldn't be — she is not a widow, her
husband is alive — has your friend any children ? "

"Yes, one, she mentioned it."

"How old?"

"Six years old, I think she said. She talks of the
' responsibility of bringing up an orphan.'"

"George, what time is it? " Esther asked suddenly.

"About nine o'clock."

"Would you mind coming out with me?"

" I should like it. Where shall we go ? "

"To St. Adhelm's ! It is close by here. There is a
special late service to-night, and Mrs. Arne is sure to
be there."



Digitized by



Google



ii2 TALES OF THE UNEASY

"Oh, Esther— curiosity ! "

"No, not mere curiosity. Don't you see if it is my
Mrs. Arne who talked to you like this, it is very serious ?
I have thought her ill for a long time; but as ill as
that ! "

At St. Adhelm's Church, Esther Graham pointed out a
woman who was kneeling beside a pillar in an attitude of
intense devotion and abandonment. She rose from her
knees, and turned her rapt face up towards the pulpit
whence the Reverend Ralph Bligh was holding his im-
passioned discourse. George Graham touched his cousin
on the shoulder, and motioned to her to leave her place
on the outermost rank of worshippers.

"That is the woman ! " said he.



IV

"Mem.: to go and see Mrs. Arne." The doctor
came across this note in his bldtting-pad one day six
weeks later. His daughter was out of town. He had
heard nothing of the Arnes since her departure. He
had promised to go and see her. He was a little con-
science-stricken. Yet another week elapsed before he
found time to call upon the daughter of his old tutor.

At the corner of Tite Street he met Mrs. Arne's hus-
band, and stopped. A doctor's professional kindliness
of manner is, or ought to be, independent of his personal
likings and dislikings, and there was a pleasant cordiality
about his greeting which should have provoked a
corresponding fervour on the part of Edward Arne.

" How are you, Arne ? " Graham said. " I was on my
way to call on your wife."

"Ah— yes!" said Edward Arne, with the ascending
inflection of polite acquiescence. A ray of blue from his



Digitized by



Google



THE PRAYER 113

eyes,rested transitorily on the doctor's face, and in that
short moment the latter noted its intolerable vacuity, and
for the first time in his life felt a sharp pang of sympathy
for the wife of such a husband.

"I suppose you are off to your club? — er — good-
bye ! " he wound up abruptly. With the best will in the
world he somehow found it almost impossible to carry on
a conversation with Edward Arne, who raised his hand
to his hat-brim in token of salutation, smiled sweetly,
and walked on.

"He really is extraordinarily good-looking," reflected
the doctor, as he watched him down the street and safely
over the crossing with a certain degree of solicitude for
which he could not exactly account. "And yet one feels
one's vitality ebbing out at the finger-ends as one talks
to him. I shall begin to believe in Esther's absurd
fancies about him soon. Ah, there's the little girl ! " he
exclaimed, as he turned into Cheyne Walk and caught
sight of her with her nurse, making violent demonstra-
tions to attract his attention. "She is alive, at any rate.
How is your mother, Dolly ? " he asked.

"Quite well, thank you," was the child's reply. She
added, "She's crying. She sent me away because I
looked at her. So I did. Her cheeks are quite red."

"Run away — run away and play 1 " said the doctor
nervously. He ascended the steps of the house, and
rang the bell very gently and neatly.

"Not at " began Foster, with the intonation of

polite falsehood, but stopped on seeing the doctor, who,
with his daughter, was a privileged person. " Mrs. Arrre
will see you, Sir."

"Mrs. Arne is not alone? " he said interrogatively.

"Yes, Sir, quite alone. I have just taken tea in."

Dr. Graham's doubts were prompted by the low
murmur as of a voice, or voices, which came to him
1



Digitized by



Google



U4 TALES OF THE UNEASY

through the open door of the room at the head of the
stairs. He paused and listened while Foster stood by,
merely remarking, "Mrs. Arne do talk to herself some-
times, Sir."

It was Mrs. Arne's voice — the doctor recognized it
now. It was not the voice of a sane or healthy woman.
He at once mentally removed his visit from the category
of a morning call, and prepared for a semi-professional
inquiry.

"£)on't announce me," he said to Foster, and quietly
entered the back drawing-room, which was separated by
a heavy tapestry portiere from the room where Mrs. Arne
sat, with an open book on the table before her, from
which she had been apparently reading aloud. Her
hands were now clasped tightly over her face, and when,
presently, she removed them and began feverishly to
turn page after page of her book, the crimson of her
cheeks was seamed with white where her fingers had
impressed themselves.

The doctor wondered if she saw him, for though her
eyes were fixed in his direction, there was no apprehen-
sion in them. She went on reading, and it was the text,
mingled with passionate interjection and fragmentary
utterances, of the Burial Service that met his ears.

"'For as in Adam all die ! * All die ! It says all !
For he must reign. . . . The last enemy that shall be
destroyed is Death. What shall they do if the dead rise
not at all ! ... I die daily ... 1 Daily ! No, no,
better get it over . . . dead and buried . . . out of
sight, out of mind . . . under a stone. Dead men don't
come back. ... Go on ! Get it over. I want to hear
the earth rattle on the coffin, and then I shall know it is
done. N< Flesh and blood cannot inherit ! ' Oh, what
did I do ? What have I done ? Why did I wish it so



Digitized by



Google



THE PRAYER 115

fervently ? Why did I pray for it so earnestly ? God
gave me my wish "

"Alice ! Alice ! " groaned the doctor.

She looked up. "'When this corruptible shall have

put on incorruption ' ' Dust to dust, ashes to ashes,

earth to earth ' Yes, that is it. ' After death,

though worms destroy this body ' "

She flung the book aside and sobbed.

"That is what I was afraid of. My God ! My God !
Down there — in the dark — for ever and ever and ever !
I could not bear to think of it ! My Edward I And so
I interfered . . . and prayed . . . and prayed till . . .
Oh ! I am punished. Flesh and blood could not in-
herit 1 I kept him there — I would not let him go. . . .
I kept him. ... I prayed. ... I denied him Christian
burial. . . . Oh, how could I know. . . ."

"Good heavens, Alice 1 " said Graham, coming
sensibly forward, " what does this mean ? I have heard
of schoolgirls going through the marriage service by
themselves, but the burial service "

He laid down his hat and went on severely, "What
have you to do with such things ? Your child is flourish-
ing — your husband alive and here "

"And who kept him here?" interrupted Alice Arne
fiercely, accepting the fact of his appearance without
comment.

"You did," he answered quickly, "with your care and
tenderness. I believe the warmth of your body, as you
lay beside him for that half-hour, maintained the vital
heat during that extraordinary suspension of the heart's
action, which made us all give him up for dead. You
were his best doctor, and brought him back to us."

"Yes, it was I — it was I — you need not tell me it
was I ! "
1 2



Digitized by



Google



u6 TALES OF THE UNEASY

"Come, be thankful ! " he said cheerfully. "Put that
book away, and give me some tea, I'm very cold."

"Oh, Dr. Graham, how thoughtless of me!" said
Mrs. Arne, rallying at the slight imputation on her
politeness he had purposely made. She tottered to the
bell and rang it before he could anticipate her.

"Another cup," she said quite calmly to Foster, who
answered it. Then she sat down quivering all over with
the suddenness of the constraint put upon her.

"Yes, sit down and tell me all about it," said Dr.
Graham good-humouredly, at the same time observing
her with the closeness he gave to difficult cases.

"There is nothing to tell," she said simply, shaking her
head, and futilely altering the position of the tea-cups
on the tray. " It all happened years ago. Nothing can
be done now. Will you have sugar ? "

He drank his tea and made conversation. He talked
to her of some Dante lectures she was attending ; of some
details connected with her child's Kindergarten classes.
These subjects did not interest her. There was a sub-
ject she wished to discuss, he could see that a question
trembled on her tongue, and tried to lead up to it.

She introduced it herself, quite quietly, over a second
cup. "Sugar, Dr. Graham? I forget. Dr. Graham,
tell me, do you believe that prayers — wicked unreason-
able prayers — are granted ? "

He helped himself to another slice of bread and butter
before answering.

"Well," he said slowly, "it seems hard to believe that
every fool who has a voice to pray with, and a brain
where to conceive idiotic requests with, should be per-
mitted to interfere with the economy of the universe.
As a rule, if people were long-sighted enough to see the
result of their petitions, I fancy very few of us would
venture to interfere."



Digitized by



Google



THE PRAYER 117

Mrs. Arne groaned.

She was a good Churchwoman, Graham knew, and he
did not wish to sap her faith in any way, so he said no
more, but inwardly wondered if a too rigid interpreta-
tion of some of the religious dogmas of the Vicar of
St. Adhelm's, her spiritual adviser, was not the clue to
her distress. Then she put another question —

"Eh! What?" he said. "Do I'believe in ghosts?
I will believe you if you will tell me you have seen one."

"You know, Doctor," she went on, "I was always
afraid of ghosts — of spirits — things unseen. I couldn't
ever read about them. I could not bear the idea of some
one in the room with me that I could not see. There
was a text that always frightened me that hung up in
my room : ' Thou, God, seest me ! ' It frightened me
when I was a child, whether I had been doing wrong
or not. But now," shuddering, "I think there are worse
things than ghosts."

"Well, now, what sort of things?" he asked good-
humouredly . " Astral bodies ? "

She leaned forward and laid her hot hand on his.

"Oh, Doctor, tell me, if a spirit — without the body
we know it by — is terrible, what of a body " — her voice
sank to a whisper, "a body — senseless — lonely — stranded
on this earth — without a spirit ? "

She was watching his face anxiously. He was divided
between a morbid inclination to laugh and the feeling
of intense discomfort provoked by this wretched scene.
He longed to give the conversation a more cheerful turn,
yet did not wish tp offend her by changing it too
abruptly.

" I have heard of people not being able to keep body
and soul together," he replied at last, "but I am not
aware that practically such a division of forces has ever
been achieved. And if we could only accept the theory



Digitized by



Google



u8 TALES OF THE UNEASY

of the de-spiritualized body, what a number of anti-
pathetic people now wandering about in the world it
would account for ! "

The piteous gaze of her eyes seemed to seek to ward
off the blow of his misplaced jocularity. He left his
seat and sat down on the couch beside her.

" Poor child ! poor girl ! you are ill, you are over-
excited. What is it ? Tell me," he asked her as tenderly
as the father she had lost in early life might have done.
Her head sank on his shoulder.

"Are you unhappy? " he asked her gently.

"Yes!"

"You are too mych alone. Get your mother or your
sister to come and stay with you."

" They won't come," she wailed. " They say the house
is like a grave. Edward has made himself a study in
the basement. It's an impossible room — but he has
moved all his things in, and I can't — I won't go to him
there. ..."

"You're wrong. For it's only a fad," said Graham,
"he'll tire of it. And you must see more people some-
how. It's a pity my daughter is away. Had you any
visitors to-day ? "

"Not a soul has crossed the threshold for eighteen
days."

"We must change all that," said the doctor vaguely.
" Meantime you must cheer up. Why, you have no need
to think of ghosts and graves — no need to be melancholy
— you have your husband and your child "

" I have my child — yes."

The doctor took hold of Mrs. Arne by the shoulder,
and held her a little away from him. He thought he had
found the cause of her trouble — a more commonplace
one than he had supposed.



Digitized by



Google



THE PRAYER 119

"I have known you, Alice, since you were a child,"
he said gravely. "Answer me! You love your hus-
band, don't you?"

"Yes." It was as if she were answering futile prefa-
tory questions in the witness-box. Yet he saw by the
intense excitement in her eyes that he had come to the
point she feared, and yet desired to bring forward.

"And he loves you?"

She was silent.

"Well, then, if you love each other, what more can
you want ? Why do you say you have only your child
in that absurd way ? "

She was still silent, and he gave her a little shake.

" Tell me, have you and he had any difference lately ?
Is there any — coldness — any — temporary estrangement
between you ? "

He was hardly prepared for the burst of foolish
laughter that proceeded from the demure Mrs. Arne as
she rose and confronted him, all the blood in her body
seeming for the moment to rush to her usually pale
cheeks.

" Coldness ! Temporary estrangement ! If that were
all ! Oh, is every one blind but me ? There is all the
world between us ! — all the difference between this world
and the next I "

She sat down again beside the doctor and whispered
in his ear, and her words were like a breath of hot wind
from some Gehenna of the soul.

"Oh, Doctor, I have borne it for six years, and I must
speak. No other woman could bear what I have borne,
and yet be alive ! And I loved him so; you don't know
how I loved him ! That was it — that was my crime "

"Crime?" repeated the doctor.

"Yes, crime! It was impious, don't you see? But



Digitized by



Google



120 TALES OF THE UNEASY

I have been punished. Oh, Doctor, you don't know
what my life is! Listen! Listen! I must tell you.

To live with a At first before I guessed when I used

to put my arms round him, and he merely submitted —
and then it dawned on me what I was kissing ! It is
enough to turn a living woman into stone — for I am
living, though sometimes I forget it. Yes, I am a live
woman, though I live in a grave. Think what it is ! —
to wonder every night if you will be alive in the morning,
to lie down every night in an open grave — to smell death
in every corner — every room — to breathe death — to
touch it. . . ."

The portiere in front of the door shook, a hoopstick
parted it, a round white clad bundle supported on a pair
of mottled red legs peeped in, pushing a hoop in front
of her. The child made no noise. Mrs. Arne seemed
to have heard her, however. She slewed round violently
as she sat on the sofa beside Dr. Graham, leaving her
hot hands clasped in his.

"You ask Dolly," she exclaimed. "She knows it, too
— she feels it."

"No, no, Alice, this won't do ! " the doctor adjured her
very low. Then he raised his voice and ordered the
child from the room. He had managed to lift Mrs.
Arne's feet and laid her full length on the sofa by the
time the maid reappeared. She had fainted.

He pulled down her eyelids and satisfied himself as
to certain facts he had up till now dimly apprehended.
When Mrs. Arne's maid returned, he gave her mistress
over to her care and proceeded to Edward Arne's new
study in the basement.

" Morphia ! " he muttered to himself, as he stumbled
and faltered through gaslit passages, where furtive
servants eyed him and scuttled to their burrows.



Digitized by



Google



THE PRAYER 121

"What is he burying himself down here for?" he
thought. "Is it to get out of her way? They are a
nervous pair of them ! "

Arne was sunk in a large arm-chair drawn up before
the fire. There was no other light, except a faint reflec-
tion from the gas-lamp in the road, striking down past
the iron bars of the window that was sunk below the level
of the street. The room was comfortless and empty,
there was little furniture in it except a large bookcase at
Arne's right hand and a table with a Tantalus on it
standing some way off. There was a faded portrait in
pastel of Alice Arne over the mantelpiece, and beside
it, a poor pendant, a pen and ink sketch of the master of
the house. They were quite discrepant, in size and
medium, but they appeared to look at each other with
the stolid attentiveness of newly married people.

"Seedy, Arne?" Graham said.

"Rather, to-day. Poke the fire for me, will
you?"

"I've known you quite seven years," said the doctor
cheerfully, "so I presume I can do that. . . . There,

now 1 . . . And I'll presume further What have

we got here ? "

He took a small bottle smartly out of Edward Arne's
fingers and raised his eyebrows. Edward Arne had
rendered it up agreeably; he did not seem upset or
annoyed.

"Morphia. It isn't a habit. I only got hold of the
stuff yesterday — found it about the house. Alice was
very jumpy all day, and communicated her nerves to me,
I suppose. I've none as a rule, but do you know,
Graham, I seem to be getting them — feel things a good
deal more than I did, and want to talk about them."



Digitized by



Google



122 TALES OF THE UNEASY

"What, are you growing a soul?" said the doctor
carelessly, lighting a cigarette.

"Heaven forbid!" Arne answered equably. "I've
done very well without it all these years. But I'm fond
of old Alice, you know, in my own way. When I was
a young man, I was quite different. I took things hardly
and got excited about them. Yes, excited. I was wild
about Alice, wild ! Yes, by Jove ! though she has for-
gotten all about it."

"Not that, but still it's natural she should long for
some little demonstration of affection now and then
. . . and she'd be awfully distressed if she saw you
fooling with that bottle of morphia ! You know, Arne,
after that narrow squeak you had of it five years ago,
Alice and I have a good right to consider that your life
belongs to us ! "

Edward Arne settled in his chair and replied, rather
fretfully—

"All very well, but you didn't manage to do the job
thoroughly. You didn't turn me out lively enough to
please Alice. She's annoyed because when I take her
in my arms, I don't hold her tight enough. I'm too
quiet, too languid ! . . . Hang it all, Graham, I believe
she'd like me to stand for Parliament ! . . . Why can't
she let me just go along my own way? Surely a man
who's come through an illness like mine can be let off
parlour tricks ? All this worry — it culminated the other
day when I said I wanted to colonize a room down here,
and did, with a spurt that took it out of me horribly, —
all this worry, I say, seeing her upset and so on, keeps
me low, and so I feel as if I wanted to take drugs to
soothe me." »

"Soothe!" said Graham. "This stuff is more than
soothing if you take enough of it. I'll send you some-



Digitized by



Google



THE PRAYER 123

thing more like what you want, and I'll take this away,
by your leave."

"I really can't argue!" replied Arne. ... "If you
see Alice, tell her you find me fairly comfortable and
don't put her off this room. I really like it best. She
can come and see me here, I keep a good fire, tell her.
... I feel as if I wanted to sleep . . ." he added brusquely.

"You have been indulging already," said Graham
softly. Arne had begun to doze off. His cushion had
sagged down, the doctor stooped to rearrange it, care-
lessly laying the little phial for the moment in a crease
of the rug covering the man's knees.

Mrs. Arne in her mourning dress was crossing the
hall as he came to the top of the basement steps and
pushed open the swing door. She was giving some
orders to Foster, the butler, who disappeared as the
doctor advanced.

"You're about again," he said, "good girl 1 "

"Too silly of me," she said, "to be hysterical ! After
all these years ! One should be able to keep one's own
counsel. But it is over now, I promise I will never speak
of it again."

" We frightened poor Dolly dreadfully. I had to order
her out like a regiment of soldiers."

"Yes, I know. I'm going to her now."

On his suggestion that she should look in) on her
husband first she looked askance.

"Down there!"

"Yes, that's his fancy. Let him be. He is a good
deal depressed about himself and you. He notices a
great deal more than you think. He isn't quite «as
apathetic as you describe him to be. . . . Come here ! "
He led her int£> the unlit dining-room a little way. " You



Digitized by



Google



i2 4 TALES OF THE UNEASY

expect too much, my dear. You do really ! You make
too many demands on the vitality you saved."

"What did one save him for?" she asked fiercely.
She continued more quietly, " I know. I am going to
be different."

"Not you," said Graham fondly. He was very partial
to Alice Arne in spite of her silliness. "You'll worry
about Edward till the end of the chapter. I know you.
And" — he turned her round by the shoulder so that
she fronted the light in the hall — "you elusive thing, let
me have a good look at you. . . . Hum I Your eyes,
they're a bit starey. . . ."

He let her go again with a sigh of impotence. Some-
thing must be done . . . soon ... he must think. . . .
He got hold of his coat and began to get into it. . . .

Mrs. Arne smiled, buttoned a button for him and then
opened the front door, like a good hostess, a very little
way. With a quick flirt of his hat he was gone, and
she heard the clap of his brougham door and the order
"Home."

• ••••••

"Been saying good-bye to that thief Graham?" said
her husband gently, when she entered his room, her
pale eyes staring a little, her thin hand busy at the front
of her dress. . . .

"Thief? Why? One moment! Where's your
switch ? "

She found it and turned on a blaze of light from
which her husband seemed to shrink.

" Well, he carried off my drops. Afraid of my poison-
ing myself, I suppose ? "

"Or acquiring the morphia habit," said his wife in a
dull level voice, "as I have."

She paused. He made no comment. Then, picking



Digitized by



Google



THE PRAYER 125

up the little phial Dr. Graham had left in the crease of
the rug, she spoke —

"You are the thief, Edward, as it happens, this is
mine."

"Is it? I found it knocking about : I didn't know it
was yours. Well, will you give me some ? "

"I will, if you like."

"Well, dear, decide. You know I am in your hands
and Graham's. He was rubbing that into me to-day."

"Poor lamb ! " she said derisively; "I'd not allow my
doctor, or my wife either, to dictate to me whether I
should put an end to myself, or not."

"Ah, but you've got a spirit, you see ! " Arne yawned.
"However, let me have a go at the stuff and then you
put it on top of a wardrobe or a shelf, where I shall
know it is, but never reach out to get it, I promise you."

"No, you wouldn't reach out a hand to keep yourself
alive, let alone kill yourself," said she. "That is you
all over, Edward."

"And don't you see that is why I did die," he said,
with earnestness unexpected by her. "And then, un-
fortunately, you and Graham bustled up and wouldn't
let Nature take its course. ... I rather wish you hadn't
been so officious."

"And let you stay dead," said she carelessly. "But
at the time I cared for you so much that I should have
had to kill myself, or commit suttee like a Bengali
widow. Ah, well ! "

She reached out for a glass half-full of water that stood
on the low ledge of a bookcase close by the arm of his
chair. . . . "Will this glass do? What's in it? Only
water? How much morphia shall I give you? An
over dose ? "

"I don't care if you do, and that's a fact."



Digitized by



Google



126 TALES OF THE UNEASY

" It was a joke, Edward," she said piteously .

"No joke to me. This fag end of life I've clawed hold
of, doesn't interest me. And I'm bound to be interested
in what Fm doing or Fm no good. Fm no earthly good
now. I don't enjoy life, Fve nothing to enjoy it with
— in here" — he struck his breast. "It's like a dull
party one goes to by accident. All I want to do is to
get into a cab and go home."

His wife stood over him with the half-full glass in one
hand and the little bottle in the other. Her eyes dilated
. . . her chest heaved. . . .

" Edward ! " she breathed. " Was it all so useless ? "

" Was what useless ? Yes, as I was telling you, I go
as one in a dream — a bad, bad dream, like the dreams
I used to have when I overworked at college. I was
brilliant, Alice, brilliant, do you hear? At some cost,
I expect ! Now I hate people — my fellow creatures.
Fve left them. They come and go, jostling me, and
pushing me, on the pavements as I go along, avoiding
them. Do you know where they should be, really, in
relation to me ? "

He rose a little in his seat — she stepped nervously
aside, made as if to put down the bottle and the glass
she was holding, then thought better of it and continued
to extend them mechanically.

"They should be over my head. Fve already left
them and their petty nonsense of living. They mean
nothing to me, no more than if they were ghosts walking.
Or perhaps it's I who am a ghost to them? . . . You
don't understand it. It's because I suppose you have
no imagination. You just know what you want and do
your best to get it. You blurt out your blessed petition
to your Deity and the idea that you're irrelevant never
enters your head, soft, persistent, High Church thing
that you are ! . . ."



Digitized by



Google



THE PRAYER 127

Alice Arne smiled, and balanced the objects she was
holding. He motioned her to pour out the liquid from
one to the other, but she took no heed; she was listen-
ing with all her ears. It was the nearest approach to
the language of compliment, to anything in the way of
loverlike personalities that she had heard fall from his
lips since his illness. He went on, becoming as it were
lukewarm to his subject —

"But the worst of it is that once break the cord that
links you to humanity — it can't be mended. Man
doesn't live by bread alone ... or lives to disappoint
you. What am I to you, without my own poor person-
ality? . . . Don't stare so, Alice! I haven't talked so
much or so intimately for ages, have I? Let me try
and have it out. . . . Are you in any sort of hurry ? "

"No, Edward."

"Pour that stuff out and have done. . . . Well, Alice,
it's a queer feeling, I tell you. One goes about with
one's looks on the ground, like a man who eyes the
bed he is going to lie down in, and longs for. Alice,
the crust of the earth seems a barrier between me and
my own place. I want to scratch the boardings with my
nails and shriek something like this : * Let me get down
to you all, there where I belong ! ' It's a horrible sensa-
tion, like a vampire reversed ! . . ."

"Is that why you insisted on having this room in
the basement ? " she asked breathlessly.

"Yes, I can't bear being upstairs, somehow. Here,
with these barred windows and stone-cold floors ... I
can see the people's feet walking above there in the street
. . . one has some sort of illusion. ..."

"Oh ! " She shivered and her eyes travelled like those
of a caged creature round the bare room and fluttered
when they rested on the sombre windows imperiously
barred. She dropped her gaze to the stone flags that



Digitized by



Google



128 TALES OF THE UNEASY

showed beyond the oasis of Turkey carpet on which
Arne's chair stood. . . . Then to the door, the door
that she had closed on entering. It had heavy bolts,
but they were not drawn against her, though by the look
of her eyes it seemed she half imagined they were. . . .

She made a step forward and moved her hands slightly.
She looked down on them and what they held . . . then
changed the relative positions of the two objects and
held the bottle over the glass. . . .

"Yes, come along!" her husband said. "Are you
going to be all day giving it me ? "

With a jerk, she poured the liquid out into a glass and
handed it to him. She looked away — towards the
door. . . .

" Ah, your way of escape ! " said he, following her
eyes. Then he drank, painstakingly.

The empty bottle fell out of her hands. She wrung
them, murmuring —

"Oh, if I had only known ! "

"Known what? That I should go near to cursing
you for bringing me back ? "

He fixed his cold eyes on her, as the liquid passed
slowly over his tongue. . . .

" — Or that you would end by taking back the gift you
gave ? "



Digitized by



Google



THE COACH



Digitized by LiOO? IC



Digitized by



Google



THE COACH

It was a lonely part of the country, far north, where
the summer nights are pale and light and scant of shade.
This summer night there was no moon, and yet it was not
dark. For hours the flat, deprecating earth had lain
prone under a storm of wind and rain. Its patient sur-
face was drenched, blanched, smitten into blindness. The
tumbled waters of the Firth splashed on the edges of the
plain, their wild commotion dwarfed by the noise of the
wind-driven showers, whose gloomy drops tapped the
waters into sullen acquiescence. Half a mile inland the
road to the north was laid. Clear and straight it ran,
with never a house or homestead to break it, viscous with
clay here, shining with quartz there, uncompromising,
exact, like the lists of old, dressed for a tourney. Its sides
were bare, scantily garnished with grass. This was
nearly a hedgeless country. In places the undeviating
line of it passed through a little coppice or clump of
gnarled, ill-conditioned, nameless trees. They seemed to
lean forward vindictively on either side, snapping their
horny fingers at each other, waving their cantankerous
branches as the gusts took them, broke them, and whirled
the fragments of their ruin far away and out of ken, like
a flapping, unruly kite which a child has allowed to pass
beyond his control. The broad white surface of the road
was not suffered to be blotted for a single moment.
Nothing could rest for the play of the intriguing air-
currents, surging backwards and forwards, blind, stupid
k 2 131



Digitized by



Google



132 TALES OF THE UNEASY

and swelled with pride, till they had got completely out
of hand and defied the archers of the middle sky. They
staggered hither and thither like ineffectual giants ; they
buffeted all impartially; they instigated the hapless
branches at their mercy to wild lashings of each other,
to useless accesses of the spirit of self-destruction. Bend-
ing slavishly under the heavy gusts, each shabby blade
of grass by the roadside rose again and was on the qui
vive after the rustling tyrant had passed.

It was then, in the succeeding moments of comparative
peace, when the directors of the passionate aerial revolt
had managed to call their panting rabble off for the time,
that great perpendicular sheets of rain, like stage films
slung evenly from heavenly temples, descended and
began moving continuously sideways, like a wall, across
the level track. A sheet of whole water, blotting out the
tangled borders of herbage that grew sparsely round the
heaps of stones with which the margin was set at in-
tervals, placed there ready for breaking. When the slab
of rain had moved on again, the broad road, shining out
sturdily with its embedded quartz and milky kneaded
clay, lay clear once more. Calm, ordered and tranquil in
the midst of tumult and discord, it pursued its appointed
course, edging off from its evenly bevelled sides the noisy
moorland streams, that had come jostling each other in
their haste to reach it, only to be relegated, noisily com-
plaining, to the swollen, unrecognizable gutter.

At a certain point on the line of way, a tall, spare,
respectable-looking man in a well-fitting grey frock coat
stood waiting. The rain ran down the back of his coat
collar, and dripped off the rim of his tall hat. His attitude
suggested some weary foredone clerk waiting at the
corner of the city street for the omnibus that was to carry
him home to his slippered comfort and sober pipe of



Digitized by



Google



THE COACH 133

peace. He wore no muffler, but then it was summer — St.
John's Eve, He leaned on an ivory-headed ebony stick
of which he seemed fond, and peered, not very eagerly,
along the road, which now lay in dazzling rain-washed
clarity under the struggling moon. There was a lull in
the storm. He had no luggage, no umbrella, yet his
grey coat looked neat, and his hat shiny.

Far in the distance, from the south, a black clumsy
object appeared, labouring slowly along. It was a coach,
of heavy and antique pattern. As soon as he had sighted
it, the passenger's faint interest seemed diminished.
With a bored air of fulfilment, he dropped his eyes and
looked down disapprovingly at the clayey mud at his feet,
although, indeed, the sticky substance did not appear to
have marred the exquisite polish of his shoes. His palm
settled composedly on the ivory knob of his trusty stick,
as though it were the hand of an old friend.

With all the signs of difficult going, but no noise of
straining or grinding, the coach at last drew up in front
of the expectant passenger. He looked up quietly, and
recognized it as the vehicle wherein it was appointed that
he should travel in this unsuitable weather for a stage
or two, maybe. All was correct, the coachman, grave,
business-like, headless as of usage, the horses long-tailed,
black, conventional. . . .

The door opened noiselessly, and the step was let
down. The passenger shook his head as he delicately
put his foot on to it, and observed for the benefit,
doubtless, of the person or persons inside —

"I see old Joe on the box in his official trim. Rather
unnecessary, all this ceremony, I venture to think ! A
few yokels and old women to impress, if indeed, any one
not positively obliged is abroad on a night like this !
For form's sake, I suppose ! "



Digitized by



Google



134 TALES OF THE UNEASY

He took his seat next the window. There were four
occupants of the coach beside himself. They all nodded
formally, but not unkindly. He returned their saluta-
tions with old-fashioned courtesy, though unacquainted
seemingly with any of them.

Sitting next to him was a woman evidently of fashion.
Her heavy and valuable furs were negligently cast on
one side, to show a plastron covered with jewels. She
wore at least two enamelled and jewel-encrusted watches
pinned to her bosom as a mark for thieves to covet. It
was foolish of her. So at least thought the man in the
grey frock coat. Her yellow wig was much awry. Her
eyes were weak, strained, and fearful, and she aided their
vision with a diamond-beset pince-nez. Now and again
she glanced over her left shoulder as if in some alarm,
and at such times she always grasped her gold-net reticule
feverishly. She was obviously a rich woman in the
world, a first-class train-de-luxe passenger.

The woman opposite her belonged as unmistakably to
the people. She was hard-featured, worn with a life
of sordid toil and calculation, but withal stout and
motherly, a figure to inspire the fullest confidence. She
wore a black bonnet with strings, and black silk gloves
heavily darned. Round her sunken white collar, a golden
gleam of watch-chain was now and then discernible.

At the other end of the coach, squeezed up into the
corner where the vacillating light of the lamp hung from
the roof least penetrated, a neat, sharp-featured man
nestled and hid. His forehead retreated, and his bowler
hat was set unnecessarily far back, lending him an air of
folly and congenital weakness which his long, cold, clever
nose could not dissipate. He was white as old enamel.

But the man whom the gentleman in the frock coat
took to among his casual fellow-travellers was the



Digitized by



Google



THE COACH 135

one sitting directly opposite him, a rough, hearty crea-
ture, who alone of all the taciturn coachful seemed dis-
posed to enter into a casual conversation, which might
go some way to enliven the dreariness entailed by this
somewhat old-fashioned mode of travelling. Gay talk
might help to drown the dashing of the waters of the
Firth lying close on the right hand of the section of road
they were even now traversing, and the ugly roar of the
wind and rain against the windows. This — by com-
parison — cheerful fellow was dressed like a working man,
in a shabby suit of corduroys. He wore no collar, but
a twisted red cotton handkerchief was wound tightly
round his thick squat neck. His little mean eyes, swinish,
but twinkling good-humouredly, stared enviously at the
neat gentleman's stiff collar and the delicate grey tones
of his suiting. Crossing and uncrossing his creasy legs,
in the unusual effort of an attempt at conviviality, the
man in corduroys addressed the man in the frock coat
awkwardly enough, but still civilly.

"Well, mate ! They've chosen a rare rough night to
shift us on ! Orders from headquarters, I suppose ? I've
been here nigh on a year and never set eyes on my boss ! "

"We used to call him God the Father," said the elder
man slowly. . . . "But whoever it is that orders our
ways here, there is no earthly sense in questioning His
arrangements, we can only fall in with them. As you
admit, you are fairly new, and perhaps you do not as yet
conceive fully of the silent impelling force that sways us.
It is the same in the world we have left, only that there
we were only concerned with the titles and standing of
our ' boss,' as you call Him, and obeyed His laws not a
whit. I must say I consider this particular system of
soul transference that we have to submit to, very un-
settling and productive of restlessness among us — a mere



Digitized by



Google



136 TALES OF THE UNEASY

survival and tiresome superstition, to my mind. It has
one merit ; one sees something of the under world, travel-
ling about as we do, and meeting chance, perhaps kindred
spirits on the road. One realizes, too, that Hades is not
quite as grey, shall I say, as it is painted ! But perhaps,"
he added, with a slight touch of class hauteur, "you do
not quite foHow me ? "

"Oh yes, Master, I do," eagerly replied the fellow-
traveller to whom he chose to address his monologue.
"Since I've been dead, I have learned the meaning of
many things. I turn up my nose at nothing these days.
I always neglected my schooling, but now I tell you I
try to make up for lost time. From a rough sort of fellow
that I was, with not an idea in my head beyond my beer
and my prog, I have come to take my part in the whole
of knowledge. It was all mine before, so to speak, but
I didn't trouble to put my hand out for it. Didn't care,
didn't listen to Miss that taught me, or to Parson, either.
He had some good ideas too, as Pve come to know,
though Vice isn't Vice exactly with us here, now, in a
manner of speaking. If God Almighty made us, why did
He make us, even in parts, bad? That's what I want
to know, and I'll know that when I've been dead a bit
longer. Why did He give me rotten teeth so that I
couldn't chew properly and didn't care for my food and
liked drink better? It's dirt and digestion makes drink-
ing and devilry, I say."

The smart woman interrupted him with a kind of
languid eagerness, exclaiming —

"I must say I agree with you. Since the pestle fell
on my shoulder in that lonely villa at Monte, I have
realized what the dreadful gambling fever may lead to.
It had made those two who treated me so ill, quite
inhuman;' They had become wild beasts. I ought never
to have accepted their treacherous invitation to luncheon,



Digitized by



Google



THE COACH 137

never tempted them with my outrageous display of
jewels ! And look here, I was tarred with the same stick,
I gambled too "

She rummaged in her reticule and fished out a ticket
for the rooms at Monte Carlo.

"I always call that the ticket for my execution.
Though my executioners were rather unnecessarily
brutal. They will attain unto this place more easily than
I did. Hardly any pain. The hand of the law is gentle,
compared with the methods of "

The man in the grey frock coat raised his finger
warningly. "No names, I beg. One of our conven-
tions ... ! "

" Have a drop ? " said the calm motherly woman to the
excited fine lady. "Your wound is recent, isn't it?
Yours was a very severe case ! A bloody murder, I call
it, if ever there was one, and clumsy at that ! And you
only passive, which is always so much harder, they say 1
I can't tell, for I was what you may call an active party.
They don't seem to mind mixing, they that look after us
herel They lump us all together — travelling, at any
rate ! Though when I think of what I was actually turned
off ior l well — the way I look at it, what I did was a
positive benefit to Society, and some sections of Society
knew it, too, and would have liked to preserve my life."

"But what, Madam, if I may ask, was your little
difficulty ? "

"It is called, I believe, Baby Farming," she replied
off-handedly, receiving her flask back from the smart
woman and stowing it away in a capacious pocket. As
she spoke, a shudder like a transitory ripple on a rain-
swept stream passed over her hearers, with the exception
of the thin man in the far corner, who preserved his
serenity. Raising his sunken chin, he observed the last
speaker with some slight show of interest.



Digitized by



Google



138 TALES OF THE UNEASY

The man in grey apologized.

"Excuse us, Madam. A remnant of old-world
squeamishness, uncontrollable by us for the moment.
Though perhaps, if you will, you might a little dissipate
our preconceived motions of your profession, by explain-
ing clearly your point of view."

"Delighted, I'm sure," she answered. "Funny,
though, how seriously you all take it, even here ! The
feeling against my profession seems absurdly strong
below as well as above. I was hooted as I left the court,
I recollect. It annoyed me then considerably. I thought
that those that hooted had more need to be grateful to me
if all was known and paid for. I saved their pockets for
them and their lovely honour too. They knew they
owed all that to me. For the rest, they did not care. They
went on, bless 'em, raising up seed for me to mow down
as soon as its head came above ground, and welcome !
Sly dogs, no thanks from them ! But those shivering,
shrinking women that came to me, some of them hardly
out of their teens, some of them so delicate they had no
right to have a baby at all ! — Ah, if only I hadn't let
myself take their money it would have been a work of
pure philanthropy. But I had to live, then ! Now that
that tax has been taken off, one has time to think it out
all round. But Lord ! — Society, to cry shame on me for
it I They might as well hang any other useful public
servant, like dustmen, rat-catchers, and such-like ridders
of pests. Good old Herod, that I used to hear about at
school, knew what he was doing when he cleared off all
those useless Innocents ! He was the first baby farmer,
I guess."

"You take large ground, Madam," said the man in the
frock coat, a trifle huffily.

"And I have the right; " said she, her large determined
chin emerging from its rolls of fat in her eagerness.



Digitized by



Google



THE COACH 139

"You men ought to know it, and you do well enough,
when you're honest. I was only the 'scapegoat, and took
on me the little sins of the race. It's an easy job enough,
what I did, but there's few have the stomach for it, even
then. You couldn't call it dirty work either. You just
stand by and leave 'em alone — to girn and bleat and
squinny and die."

"No blood, eh ? " the man in the corner said suddenly.
"I like blood."

" What a fine night it has turned ! " said the man in
the grey frock coat, raising the sash and putting his head
out of the window. . . . "Something rather uncanny,
eh, about that man ? " he remarked under his breath, half
to himself, half to the man in brown corduroys.

"Take your head in," said the latter, almost affection-
ately, "or you'll be catching cold, and you've a nasty
scar on your neck that I could see as you leaned forward,
and which you oughtn't to go getting the cold into."

" Oh, that ! " said the other complacently, sitting down
again, but averting his gaze carefully from the man in
the corner, for whom he seemed to feel a repulsion as
marked as was his preference for his cheerful vis-a-vis.
"That ! That's actually the scar of the blow that killed
me. A fearful gash I He was a powerful man that dealt
it. He got me, of course, from behind. I never even
saw him. I was drafted off here at once, his hand had
been so sure." H.e felt nervously in his pockets. " I have
a foulard somewhere, but I am apt to mislay it."

"You should do like me, have a good strong handker-
cher and knot it round your neck firm. I've got a mark
of sorts on my neck too, but it isn't an open wound —
never was," the bluff man sniggered. " It is sheer vanity
with me, but I don't care to have it seen. It goes well
all round, mine does — done by a rope, eh ! "

He paused and nodded slyly. "For killing a toff.



Digitized by



Google



HO TALES OF THE UNEASY

Nice old gentleman he seemed, too, but I hadn't much
time to look at him. Had to get to work "

He was rudely interrupted by a screech from the baby
farmer.

"Lord!" she cried, "do I see another conveyance
coming on this lonely road? I do 'ope so. I'm one for
seeing plenty of people. I always like a crowd, and I
must tell you, this sort of humdrum jogging along was
beginning to get on my nerves."

They all jerked themselves round, and peered through
the glass panes behind them. The taciturn man alone
reserved his attention.

Sure enough, a dark object, plainly outlined in the
strong moonlight which now lit up the heavens, where
heavy masses of cloud had until now obscured its efful-
gence, was plainly visible. It blotted the ribbon of white
that lay in front of them. . . . Nearer and nearer it came.
All heads were at the windows of the coach. . . . Now
it was seen to be a high-hung dog-cart, of the most
modern pattern, drawn by a smart little mettled pony,
and containing two slight young girls. . . . The one
that drove held the ribbons in hands that were covered
with white dog-skin gloves, and which looked immense
in the pallid moonshine.

"What an excitement ! " said the stout woman. "We
shall pass them. Some member of one of the country
famflies abput here, I suppose."

"I hope — for all things considering, I'm not a blood-
thirsty man," the man in corduroys muttered anxiously
under his breath, "that we're not a-going to give them
a shock ! Bound to, when we meet them plumb like
this ! 'Orses can't abide the sight of us, mostly, no
more than they could those nasty motors when they first
came in. And we're worse than motors — they seem to
smell us out at once for what we are 1 "



Digitized by



Google



THE COACH i 4I

"If you do really think that pony is likely to swerve,"
said the man in the grey suit, anxiously, "would it be of
any use our asking old Diggory to drive more slowly
and humour them ? "

"Couldn't go no slower than we are ! " replied the man
in corduroys. " Besides, it's not the pace that kills I
I'll bet you that pony's all of a sweat already I "

The dog-cart approached. The faces of the two young
women were discernible. They were white — blanched
with fear, or it may have been the effect of the strong
moonlight. There was no doubt that they were dis-
turbed, and that the girl who was driving fully realized
the necessity of controlling the horse, whose nostrils were
quivering, and on whose sides foam was already appear-
ing in white swathes. ...

" It won't pass us I " said the man in the corner, speak-
ing suddenly. He rubbed his hands slowly one over the
other. " There will be blood I "

" For goodness' sake stop gloating like that I " said
the stout woman. "It turns my stomach to hear you.
Wherever can you have come from, I wonder? 'Tisn't
manners. ... I say, can't we hail them? " she inquired
of the man in grey. "All give them one big shout?"

"They wouldn't be able to hear us," he replied, shaking
his head sadly. " You must not forget that we are ghosts.
We are not really here."

"Ay, and that's what the beasts know!" cried the
man in corduroys. He jumped about. "That 'oss won't
be able to stand it. The kid'll not be able to hold him
in. • . .

"They're on us ! " screamed the smart woman. "Oh,
my God ! Do we have to sit still and see it ? " She
covered her eyes with her hand.

"Yes, Missus, I reckon you have, and what's more, run
away after like any shoffer that's killed his man and left



Digitized by



Google



142 TALES OF THE UNEASY

him lying in the roadside. Old Diggory's got his
orders."

The snorting of the pony was now audible. The coach*
ful of ghosts distinctly saw the lather of foam dropping
from its jaws. They were able, some of them, to realize
the agonized tension of one girl's hands, pulling for all
she was worth, and the scared sideways twist of her
forcedly inactive companion. Alone the face of the
yellow carriage-lamp glared, immovable. . . .

Then it flew down, and was extinguished. There was
a crash, a convulsion — and the great road to the north
lay clear again.

The Coach of Death rolled on remorselessly past a
black heap that filled the ditch on one side. It lay quite
still, after that almost human leap and heave. . . .

The smart woman fainted, or appeared to do so. The
baby farmer sat silent.

"It's iniquitous ! " exclaimed the man in grey, turning
round from the window — his eyes wet, "to leave them
behind like that without a word of inquiry, when it's our
conveyance has done all the mischief ! "

He groaned and fidgeted. . . .

The man in corduroys tried to soothe him. "We ain't
to blame, Sir, don't you think it! " he repeated. "As
you said before to the lady, we aren't really here ! "

"That is little consolation to a man of honour," the old
man said sadly. " Still, as you say, we are but tools "

He devoted himself to the smart woman, who revived
a little under his civil ministrations.

"After all," she said, "aren't we somehow or other all
in the same boat ? I shouldn't be surprised if those two
nice girls didn't join us at the next stage. If they do,
we'll make them tell us how they felt, when they first
saw the coachful of ghosts coming down on them.
They're certainly dead, for they were both pitched into



Digitized by



Google



THE COACH 143

the ditch with the cart and horse on top of them. Did
anybody see what became of the horse ? No. . . . Well,
we must settle down to dulness again, I am afraid, or,
suppose, to while away the time we all started to tell each
other the story of how we came to be here? A lively
tale might cheer us all up, after the accident."

"Agreed, Madam, heartily for my part," said the man
in grey, "though my own story is very humdrum, and
not in the least amusing. You want, of course, an
account of the particular accident that sent me here.
Very well ! But, ladies first I Will not you begin,
Madam?"

She tossed her head, with an affected air.

"My story, perhaps," she insinuated with modesty,
"might not be very new to you. It was in all the papers
so recently."

"That will not affect me," he answered, "for if, as I
presume, it was a murder case, I never read them."

"I read yours then, Missus, I expect," said the man in
corduroys. " I generally get the wife to read them out to
* me — anything spicy."

"And yet the people that did it are not hanged yet, if,
indeed, they ever are, poor souls ! I am quite anxious,"
said the smart woman, "to see how it goes. If the pair
are really sent here, I suppose I shall be running up
against them some night or other, on one of these trans-
+ ference parties. It will be very interesting. But " — she
leaned across to the baby farmer — "could we not persuade
you to give us some of your — nursery experiences,
Madam?"

"There's not much story about the drowning of a
litter of squalling puppies or whining kittens," said that
lady shortly, "we want something livelier — more per-
sonal, if I may say so. From a remark that gentleman
in the corner let drop a while ago, I fancy his reminis-



Digitized by



Google



144 TALES OF THE UNEASY

cences would be quite worth hearing, as good as a shilling
shocker."

"My story," replied the individual thus pointedly
addressed, "is impossible, frankly impossible."

"Indecent, do you mean ? " The smart woman's eyes
shone. "Oh, let us have it. You can veil it, can't
you ? "

" Have you ever heard of mental degenerates ? " he
asked her compassionately. "I was one. I was called
mad — a simple way of expressing it. I was a chemist.
I dissected neatly enough, too, like a regular butcher.
They did quite right to exterminate me."

His head dropped. He seemed disinclined to say more.
Still the smart woman persisted.

"But the details ?"

"Are purely medical, Ma'am. Not without a physio-
logical interest, I may say. Interesting to men of science,
pathologically. The" — he named a daily paper much
in vogue at that time, "made a good deal of the strong
sense of artistry — of contrast — the morbid warp inherent
in the executant "

His head sank again on his chest.

"I do believe," said the baby farmer, nudging the
smart woman, "that we shall find he's the man who killed
his sweetheart and then carefully tied her poor inside all
into true lover's knots with sky-blue ribbon. Artist,
indeed ! They're quite common colours — blue and
red "

" Disgusting ! " The delicate lady from Monte Carlo
shuddered, and turning coldly away, joined in the peti-
tion proffered by the other ghosts to the breezy man in
corduroys, to relate his experiences.

"Oh, I'll tell you how I came to join you and wel-
come ! " he said, rolling his huge neck about in its setting
of red cotton. "Well, to begin with, I was drunk.



Digitized by



Google



THE COACH 145

Equally, of course, I was hard up. My missus — she's
married again, by the way, blast her ! — was always nag-
ging me to do something for her and the kids. I did.
Nation's taking care of them now, along of what I did.
Work, she meant, but that was only by the way. I did
choose to take on a job, though, on a rich man's estate,
building some kind of Folly, lots of glass and that, work-
ing away day and night by naphtha flares, you know. He
was one of those men, you know the sort, that has more
money than a man can properly spend, and feels quite
sick about it, and says so, in interviews and so on, in the
papers a working man reads. That's the mischief. He
was always giving away chunks of money to charities
and libraries and that sort of useless lumber, but none of
it ever seemed to come the way of those that we^e in real
need of it. They said the money had got on his nerves,
and would not let him sleep o' nights, and that he was
afraid by day and went about with a loaded stick and I
don't know what all. And he was looked after by detec-
tives, at one time, so the papers said — again the papers,
putting things in people's heads, as it's their way. So
one blessed evening I was very low — funds and all, and
my missus and the kids hollering and complaining as
they always do when luck's bad. Lord bless them, they
never thought as they were 'citing their man to murder.
Women never do think. And going out with their snivel-
ling in my ears, I passed the station where he landed
every evening after his day in town, and I happened to
see him come out of the train and send away his motor
that was a-waiting for him all regular, and start out to
walk 'ome alone by a short cut across a little plantation
there was, very thick and dark, just the place for a
murder. Well — I told you I was half drunk — I raced
home and got something to do it with — a meat chopper —
to be particular " ^~



Digitized by



Google



146 TALES OF THE UNEASY

The old man opposite put his hand nervously to the
back of his neck.

" Ay, Mister, it takes you just there, does it ? You look
a regular bundle of nerves, you do. Well, as I was say-
ing, I went round by a short cut that I happened to know
of, and got in front of him and hid in the hedge. Ten
mortal minutes I waited for my man to come by. Lord,
how my hand did tremble I I'd have knocked off for
two pence. I was as nervous as a cat, but all the same, it
didn't prevent me from striking out for wife and children
with a will when my chance came. I caught him behind
with my chopper, and he fell like a log. Never lifted a
hand to defend himself — hadn't got any grit. Ladies, I
don't suppose I hurt him much, for he never even cried
out when I struck or groaned when it was done. Then I
looked him over, turned out his pockets and collared his
watch and season ticket and seals and money. Money —
hah ! — I had been fairly done over that. Would you
believe it of a rich fellow like him, he hadn't got more
than the change of a sovereign on him."

"Shame I " ejaculated the taciturn man in the corner.

" I admit it was hard on you," the man in grey observed
kindly. "Very hard, for I believe the retribution came
all too quickly. You foolishly left your chopper about
to identify you, and were apprehended at once by our
excellent rural police. Yet the law is so dilatory that
you lay in gaol a whole year before you were free to join
your victim here ? "

"Right you are, mate. Yes, I swung for it, sure
enough. Short and sweet it was once I stood on the drop,
but it still makes my poor old throat ache to think of it."

He wriggled and twisted his neck in its ruddy cinc-
ture. ...

"Now, governor, I'm done, and if you've no objection
we'd all like to hear how you came by that ugly gash of



Digitized by



Google



THE COACH 147

yours? It wasn't no rope did that. Common or garden
murder, I'll be bound."

"Certainly, my man, it was a murder — a murder most
apropos. The circumstances were peculiar. I have often
longed to get the ear of the jury who tried a man for
relieving me of my light purse and intolerably heavy life,
and tell them — the whole hard-working, conscientious
twelve of them, trying their best to bring in an honest
verdict and avenge my wrongs — my own proper feelings,
surely no negligible factor in the case ! They could not
guess, these ignorant living men, whose eyes had not yet
been opened by death to a due sense of the proportions
of things — that I bore the poor creature no malice, but
instead was actually grateful for his skilful surgery that
had severed the life-cord that bored me, so neatly and
completely."

"It isn't every one would take it like that ! " remarked
the smart woman. "Yet that is, more or less, how I feel
about these things myself. Only in my case it is impos-
sible to speak of skilful surgery ! I was disgracefully cut
up. I couldn't possibly have worn a low dress again ! "

" Have you ever heard ? " said the" man in grey thought-
fully, "of the Greek story of the Gold of Rhampsinitos,
and the inviolable cellar he built to store it in ? Accord-
ing to the modern system, my gold was hoarded in my
brain, where fat assets and sordid securities bred and
bred all day long. The laws that govern wealth are hard.
You must give it, devise it, you must not allow it to be
taken. But for my part I would have welcomed the two
sons of the master builder who broke into the Greek
King's Treasure House. In the strong-room of my brain
it lodged. With one careless calculation, one stroke of
a pen, I could make money breed money there to madden
me. I was lonely, too. I had no wife to divide my
responsibilities. She might even have enjoyed them.
l 2



— Dj^itiz



)05le



148 TALES OF THE UNEASY

But I dared approach no woman in the way of love — I did
not choose to be loved for my cheque-signing powers. I
was not loved at all. I was hated. Unrighteous things
were done in my name, by the greedy husbandmen of my
load of money. Then I was told that I went in danger of
my life, and I condescended to take care of that — for a
time — only for a time !

"One dark winter evening — I forget what had hap-
pened during the day, what fresh instance of turpitude
or greed had come before me — I was so revolted that I
kicked away all the puling safeguards by which my
agents guarded their best asset of all, and gave the rein
to my instinct. I disregarded precautions of every sort —
with the exception of my faithful loaded stick, and the
carrying of that had come to be a mere matter of habit
with me — and I walked home from the station alone and
unattended, up to my big house and good dinner which I
hoped — nay, I almost knew — that I should not be alive
to eat; And indeed, as luck would have it, on that night
of all nights the trap was set for me. The appointed
death^dealer was waiting — he took me on at once. I got
my desire— kind, speedy, merciful, violent death. I never
even saw the face of my deliverer."

"By George!" softly swore the man in corduroys.
"This beats all. Are you sure you aren't kidding us?"

" No indeed, that is exactly how I felt about it, and if
I had known of knowledge, as I knew of instinct, what
was going to happen, I would have thought to realize
some of my wealth before setting out to walk through that
wood, and made it more worth the honest fellow's while.
But as you are aware, a millionaire does not carry portable
gold about with him, and my cheque-book which I had
on me would, of course, be of no use to him. Alas, all
the poor devil got for his pains was exactly nineteen shil-
lings and eleven pence. I had changed a sovereign at the



Digitized by



Google



THE COACH 149

book-stall to buy a paper, and out of habit, had waited
for the change."

The man in corduroys was by this time in a consider-
able state of excitement. He had rent the red handker-
chief fiercely from his neck, and now made as if to tear
it across his knee. . . .

"Why, governor !" he exclaimed passionately, "do
you mean to say it was through you that I got this
here" — he put both hands behind his head and inter-
locked them, " in return for giving you that there cut at
the back of your neck ? Well, how things do come about,
to be sure ! "

"Gently, gently 1 my man," the elder soothed him.
"Don't be so melodramatic about a very ordinary co-
incidence. See, the ladies are quite upset. It doesn't do
to allow Oneself to get excited here — it's not in the rules.
If I had made the little discovery you have done, I don't
think — no, I really don't think I would have made it
public. This undue exhibition of emotion of yours
strikes me as belonging to the vulgar world we have all
left. But since you have allowed it to come out, and
every one is now aware of the peculiar relation in which
we stand to each other, you must let me tender you my
best thanks, as to a most skilful and firm operator, and
believe me to be truly grateful to you for your services
in the past."

"Quite the old school 1 " said the smart woman.

" I must say, Sir, — I consider you the real gentleman,"
said the baby farmer.

"lama gentleman."

"And a fairly accommodating one! " said the rough
man, wiping his brow where, however, no sweat was.
"It isn't every man as would give thanks for being
scragged ! "

" Every man isn't a millionaire," said his victim calmly.



Digitized by



Google



150 TALES OF THE UNEASY

The smart woman, leaning forward, tapped the old
gentleman amiably with her jewelled pince-nez.

"But we belong to the same world, I perceive," she
said, "and I am quite able to understand your refined
feeling. It is as I said in my own case. Indeed if those
two good people, who shall be nameless, had only dealt
with me a little more gently, I don't know that I should
not forgive them absolutely. I shall at any rate be per-
fectly civil when I do meet them — only perhaps a little
distant. But that Monte Carlo existence I was leading
when they interrupted it, was really becoming intoler-
able ! No one who hasn't done it, thoroughly can realize
what it is. Glare, noise, glitter, fever — that heartless,
blue, laughing sea they talk of in the railway advertise-
ments "

The baby farmer, left out in this elegant discussion,
obviously took no pleasure in it, but staring straight
before her, muttered sulkily —

"Cote d'Azur and Pentonville 1 There's some little
difference, isn't there, between one life and the other?
Yet I enjoyed my life, I did, and as for gratitude, I can't
say as I see all those blessed infants a-coming up to me,
and slobbering me for what I did for 'em. I may meet
them, but they'll not notice me. It isn't in human nature.
Their mothers' thanks was all I got, and they thanked
me beforehand in hard cash for what I was a-going to do.
Lord, what's a ricketty baby more or less ? I say, we're
slowing up ! Going to stop perhaps, and a good thing
too I "

"Yes," said the man in the grey frock coat, still
enouncing his curt sentences to the unheeding listeners,
" I am able to cordially thank the man who rid me with
one clean scientific blow of my wretched life and all its
tedious accessories. A skilled workman is worthy of
his hire "



Digitized by



Google



THE COACH 151

"Mercy! M muttered the baby farmer. "Is he never
going to stop ? If it was for nothing else, he ought to
have got scragged for being a bore ! "

But being fully wound up, though in the excitement
of arriving at the depdt no one was attending, the man in
grey continued, "Suicide I had thought of, but abhorred,
though on my soul I had nearly come to that, and then
it was merely a question of courage — you spoke truly,
Sir. Mine was a thin, pusillanimous nature, as you
said. You came by, a kind Samaritan, and sacrificed
your own good life freely to rid me of my wretched one.
I think I told you that when you were being tried, I
followed urgently all the details of the trial, and made
interest with the authorities here to allow me to appear
to the judge in his sleep, say, and instil into his mind
some inkling of the true state of my feelings towards you.
I do not know, however, if you would have thanked me,
for life may have been no sweeter to you than it was to
me — you spoke of an uncongenial helpmate, I think?
Still one never knows. I might have been Ihe means of
procuring you some good years yet, in the full exercise
of your undeniable vigour and remarkable decision of
character. But it was apparently not to be. You fol-
lowed me here, after a long interval of waiting, and now
we have met, face to face. The introduction on that
dark night was worth nothing. I like your face. We
shall probably never meet again— their ways are dark
and devious here, so I am the more glad of this oppor-
tunity of opening my mind to you on a delicate subject,
perhaps, but one that has always been very near my
heart. By the way "—he lifted his stick with its shining
ivory crown into view. "Did you notice this? You
read the papers, you said, and they told you it was
heavily weighted and that I carried it always as a pre-
caution. Well, on that eventful night for both of us—



Digitized by



Google



152 TALES OF THE UNEASY

perhaps you were too hurried to notice? — but I never
used it. Accept it now, will you not, as a memento ? . . •
I think, from sundry truly unearthly bumpings, that we
seem to have come at last to our journey's end. ... I
am right, the coachman has got down from his perch
and taken his head under his arm. . . . We part. Mes-

dames, I salute you. Again, Sir " He addressed

himself more particularly to the shamefaced man in
corduroys — "Farewell. Very pleased to have met you ! "

One by one, the passengers faded away into the dis-
tance. The polite old man paused in the semblance of an
inn yard where the coach had drawn up. A pale proud
woman's face, shining up by the step, had touched him.
She was an intending passenger, and she was alone.
She wore white dog-skin gloves, but no hat. Unusual,
he fancied, in a woman of her class. On looking closer,
he saw that she had a hat, but that it hung disregarded
over her shoulder by an elastic, and was much battered
and destroyed. He decided to speak to her.

"You are the lady we killed, I think ? " he asked gently.

She acknowledged with a bow that it was so.

"We could none of us do anything," he apologized,
"or I hope you will believe "

"Certainly, Sir, it was no fault of yours, or indeed of
the company's, I am sure. The accident was inevit-
able I " so she assured him, smiling faintly. He looked
at her kindly. There was blood on the hair, he was able
to convince himself. . . . "ButRory — our pony — never
can pass things, at the best of times, and the look of your
conveyance was certainly rather unusual. And at that
time of night we rarely meet anything at all on the Great
North Road. We choose that time on purpose, my sister
and I — we had been staying away for a week with friends,
and we were going home. When we saw you coming,
Lucy said, half in jest — she is older than I — ' Suppose



Digitized by



Google



THE COACH iS3

that thing in front were the Coach of Death the foolish
country people talk about ? They say it travels this way
once a year, with its cargo of souls, on St. John's Eve/
I bade her not be superstitious, but I confess I thought
the vehicle looked odd myself, and I did wonder how
Rory would stand it. When it came nearer I saw dis-
tinctly that the coachman was headless, and I laughingly
told my sister so. She bade me not disturb her, for
death coach or live coach, she meant to do her best to get
Rory past it. She failed "

The man in grey looked nervously around. He was
alone with the young lady in the dull inn yard. The
headless coachman was preparing to ascend to the box
seat again. . . .

"Where is your sister now?" he inquired.

" She lies at the bottom of the ditch. Rory has galloped
home. She fell on her head, but she is alive still. When
they find her in the morning, she will be dead, I know
that. For now I know all things. I am at peace. . .
you need have no care for me. . . ."

"Let me at least put you into the coach," he begged.
" And you will prefer the corner seat ? " r . .

She took it'; he went on —

"It looks, however, as if you were going to have all
the accommodation to yourself, for this stage at all
events."

He raised his hat; she bowed.

" I am grieved that I cannot have the pleasure — that I
cannot offer to accompany you, but I have my marching
orders. . . ."

He raised his hat again. . . . The coach moved on out
of the yard. Soon it was lost in the mists. . . . The
summer dawn was just breaking.



Digitized by



Google



Digitized by



Google



THE BLUE BONNET



Digitized by



Google



Digitized by



Google



THE BLUE BONNET

"... a little spark in a blue bonnet, who fought like the devil at
Preston."— Boswell.

The tourists peered past the grey stone pillars of the
gateway into the courtyard, paved with round cobbles,
grass-grown in between. The low sculptured doorway
gave admittance to the old manor house that had so
fascinated the lady of the party from the first moment
she had cast eyes on it.

" Oh, this is a bit of the real thing ! " she had exclaimed
fervently, when, five miles out of Richmond, the road
had ceased to follow the course of the Swale, mantled
all the way with heavy oak and hazel copses. They
seemed to hang like hairy beards from the beetle-browed
face of the cliffs that shelter the east bank of the river.
"The very real thing!" she had continued, as the
wagonette turned out into the open moorland, and their
town-bleached cheeks were bathed at once in the pure
sullen airs that roamed over it, softened and suffused
with the tears of an April storm gone by. "This is the
real Yorkshire moor I've read of, bare and empty, with
not a single dwelling to be seen. Yes, there's one ! "

For as their conveyance dived down into the scarp of a
hill, she sighted beyond the now familiar river which
wound again into view, directly crossing their path, and
the low bridge of quite modern construction which
Spanned it, the square mass of a house commanding the
river bank. It seemed to stand, bull-dog like, on the
slight acclivity, posing as guardian of the ford at that
place, which was certainly all that had served for cross-

*57



Digitized by



Google



158 TALES OF THE" UNEASY

ing a hundred years ago. So her instructive companion
remarked to the eager lady. She grew more and more
enthusiastic.

"John, I can't possibly pass it 1 I couldn't reconcile
it with my historical conscience to go by without an
attempt to see it. It's like a grey-haired woman stand-
ing stranded on the edge of the world, an old Ariadne
of a house, waiting for ever by the side of the flood.
. . . Ask the driver what they call it ? "

"Wallburn Old Hall," said the stolid Yorkshireman,
flicking a fly off his horse's ear.

Three blind hopeless windows which had been closed
up for the tax looked over the old garden garth. The
eyes of the persons looking thence could have swept the
stream and the narrow neck which formed the ford. The
stone flagged courtyard of the house was enclosed by
buildings on all sides 6ut one. On the west, looking
towards the river, was a ruined battlement on which a
man might still walk and survey the country round for
miles. But it was now insecure, the inner rubble
exposed. Clumps of wild mustard and garlic sprang
from every cranny and crevice and made a yellow blaze
that lit up the grey substance of the pile. The lady
unable to contain herself longer, requested the driver to
pull up and let them have a look. Her companion took
out a guide-book and read aloud, as they sat in the break
in the streaming sunshine.

" Wallburn Old Hall . . . fortified manor house . . .
dismantled. . . ."

"I should think it was!"

u Et pour cause. The old Cause of all! Listen!
Family of Daunet. There's the shield on the door,
evidently — see all that ripoussi work?-— only we can't
read it from here."



Digitized by



Google



THE BLUE BONNET 159

"The book says : ' The ancient family of Daunet, who
beareth sable gultie, argent and a canton ermine. . . .'
Yes, Guy Daunet's tomb is in the church at Redmire
— remember it? — His feet are cased in brass-toed
sollerets. Above his lady's head are three shields of
arms. She appears to have been a Conyers. Well, they
seem to be pretty well extinct now. The last Daunet
was out and killed in the fifteen. There were Daunets
in the Great Rebellion, Daunets in the Gunpowder Plot
— in the Rising in the North "

" Poor romantic dears ! "

"Yes, that's the plague of lost causes. They swayed
the emotions so forcibly and through the emotions the
very lives of the old families — those that had any good
in them. One imagines them, up to the very latest
day, having an indistinct glimmering of their own
original raison d'etre, that is, lands given in exchange
for service. . . . Their modern representatives have lost
even the glimmering. Well, oughtn't we to be driving
on?"

"Oh, no. After what you've been making out, I must
have a try to see over it. I want to make out that blurred
shield over the door. Gules argent and canton ermine,
was it ? They can but refuse us."

The young couple alighted, under mute protest from
the driver, and entered the courtyard, the lady bold, the
man nervous, deprecating. They received forthwith a
Teniers-like vision of an interior. Farm-hands were
sitting round a wooden table, placed in the oak-panelled
greasy blackness of a low raftered hall. All looked up,
and ceased pulling at their mugs. A frowsy young girl
of eighteen, wiping her mouth, came forward.

"Could we see over?" The glint of a silver coin in
the lady's hand pleasingly accentuated her request.



Digitized by



Google



160 TALES OF THE UNEASY

A voice came from the interior as the girl stood
hesitating and shy.

"Mind, hinny, thou'st not take the lady anywhere it
isn't safe. Keep out of the room the captain's leg came
through. And mind, the stairway beyont isn't much to
crack on."

The girl thus admonished, turned and led the en-
thusiastic pair in and up the rich darkness of the stair.

" That's the best part of it her mother told her to leave
out! " whispered the lady. "That about the captain's
leg. It sounds most exciting. Ask her — or I will."

The girl, questioned, replied over her shoulder.

"It's a tale, ma'am. A long while back it were — ages
and ages. They do say a man's leg came through the
floor, and he's always called the capting. The boards
is rotten just there, and was then. That whole end o'
the house is fair gone to powder. My grandfeyther used
for to say that a man's leg made it coming through. But
it was long before his time, and he were a very old man.
The ceilings of that part of the house is that powdery,
would you believe it, that we can always scrape the
plaster and get a bit for baby."

" How funny and utilitarian ! And is it haunted ? "

"Grandfeyther always said 'twas."

"Who by?"

" They do say a poor man went clean daft there — came
home and found every one lying dead about the place."

" But what had they died of ? Plague ? "

"The smit? Naw. Grandfeyther alius said 'twor a
tragedy, same as they has in the papers now-a-days."

" Where is your grandfather now ? "

She jerked her finger over towards the north.

" Churchyard. But he knew all about this place. His
feyther before him was ostler about the inn at Redmire



Digitized by



Google



THE BLUE BONNET 161

— you'll pass it on your way to Bolton. He always said
there was a hiding hole here, and mor'n that, a secret
way, but teacher says that's all nonsense and we mustn't
waste our time looking for it, besides it isn't safe. We
shut oop this part, and just pack into the other, where it's
still pretty good, and at Michaelmas we've all got to go
out and Lord Scrope is going to pull the old place down."

"Shame!"

"Oh, I dunno. It's fair rotten."

"Are you sure you can't take us into the rotten part
— just for once before it all goes ? "

"That I cannot. The worst room is the one the man's
leg came through — they call it the Lady Christina's
room. And it's there Grandfeyther says the priest's hole
was."

"It was generally out of the principal room in the
house," said the man. "They wanted him under their
own hand and to be able to feed him at night. Come
along, Mary, you really can't see it."

"I suppose not." She sighed. "But I do somehow
seem to see Christina — the Lady Christina. I suppose
her spirit is about ? Why * Lady ' ? The Daunets had
no title."

"These people always dignify ghosts and raise them
to the peerage. Let's see if we can't make up a story
for her. Christina Daunet and her lover — was he the
man who went mad or the priest she hid ? "

They were descending the stairs. Their cicerone broke
in suddenly.

"Nay, that weren't the way. The real heir was troth-
plight to the Lady Christina, and he was drowned one
day here in the ford, here under her very eyes."

"Another touch ! " said her companion eagerly. "So
legend grows. Let us go and sit out on the hill, here,

M



Digitized by



Google



162 TALES OF THE UNEASY

and look towards the ford, and I'll try to reconstruct
her story for you. Pm not a novelist for nothing. This
is how the man went mad when he came home."
• ••••••

There was no priest. The lover was that "little spark
in a blue bonnet that fought at Preston " Boswell speaks
of. Pve always wanted to connect him up with a story.
Miss Christina Daunet — not Lady — was tall and pale,
and a fine girl, so long as she had enough to eat, and
nothing to brood on. But her adolescence and greatest
need of nourishment happened to coincide with Jacobite
times of stress, when loyal subjects starved in order that
the Stuarts might come by their own. The females of
her family were used — even hardened to the more
domestic consequences of the males' unfaltering loyalty.
When the fuss was about priests, Christina's own grand-
mother had successfully concealed one in the hiding-
place in her room — that very room that we were not per-
mitted to investigate, looking towards the ford and the
road to Richmond. To-day her own mother lay there,
eighty, bedridden, daft and doited.

These two women were the widow and daughter of
the last Daunet of the direct line. Since the great Guy
of the canton ermine, the race had continually dwindled.
So many of them had been strangled, so many hanged
and drawn and quartered, a half-dozen desiccated heads
belonging to the strain had rotted on Temple Bar. Cold
steel and a touch of poison had been responsible for
some others, and thus the foolish, forlorn race had been
cleared off to make room for persons of finer judgment
and less realistic ideals. Acts of attainder, recusant
fines, had impoverished their estates, and mulcted them
of their goods, till of all the broad lands, castles and
noble manor houses that had bred and sheltered and



Digitized by



Google



THE BLUE BONNET 163

maintained Daunets for the King's service, only the
austere, embattled farm-house on the Richmondshire
moors remained, and therein the two women that alone
bore the fine fighting name slowly pined and withered
away.

They had not enough to eat. Yet their appetites were
no larger than feminine appetites are reputed to be. Sir
Christopher Daunet, Christina's father, was killed at
Sheriffmuir when his little daughter was a year old, and
her mother, grown doited with the shock, lived on to
give very little trouble, and represent no great charge
on the family finances. She lay always in her big room
in the south-west wing. Her heavy four-post bed, too
mighty and perhaps too rotten to be moved, remained
firm in its old place on the safer part of the flooring;
the tester was hung by heavy rings to the ceiling. Her
daughter, ministering to her slight wants, had learned
to walk warily round the bed.

Christina Daunet was loyal — as women are loyal.
She realized very fairly that this task of the reinstate-
ment of the Stuart dynasty on the throne of England
had been set by Providence on her and hers, incidentally
carrying with it the doom of extermination set on the
race. Their blind inherent loyalty clustered as it must,
round the losing side which sucked in, naturally, these
people who always went where their advantage was not
— and the losing side had drawn in her father, her uncle,
even the man she loved.

She loved her cousin, Charles Daunet of Scanwood.
Scanwood House lay three miles hence on the Richmond
Road. Charles was the only son of her father's only
sister. Christina and this young man were early troth-
plighted — they were about to wed — but the Stuarts came
first. It was the Cause that intervened and forbade the

M2



Digitized by



Google



i6 4 TALES OF THE UNEASY

innocent banns. Charles Daunet allowed the just im-
pediment and went out as a matter of course. He was
more eager for the day of the stranger's crowning than
for the morn that should usher in his wedding with
Christina whom he knew and loved. He had left her
too easily. Folk in the neighbourhood said he was
slack. Christina herself admitted that Charles was more
of a fighter than a lover. But the Stuarts called ! What
was a Daunet to do ?

She cried sometimes and mourned over her baulked
betrothal with her only confidant, a certain Luke
Daunet. Her father had had a son, but he was not her
mother's child. Luke lived with them — his mother had
been innkeeper's daughter over at Redmire, a good girl
enough till Sir Christopher Daunet came her way. He
lived so near, at Wallburn, and he was not the man to
leave so fair a flower ungathered.

Madam Daunet was not a hard woman. She under-
took the child's maintenance when its mother died and
Sir Christopher fell at Sheriffmuir. Luke grew up.
He was not "all there," but he was an honest, kindly,
gentle fellow, and for the two lonely women he did a
man's work about the place. There was not much to do.
There was not a beast left in the stable, except a wall-
eyed, knock-kneed pony that Luke rode into Redmire or
Marske now and then to buy necessaries. They could
afford v no other servant. The white-handed proud
Christina tended her mother, cooked, and did the inside
work of theliouse. It was all one. When the Prince
should come into his own, Christina would do so like-
wise.

Of that she had doubts sometimes, especially when
the wind whistled over the moor, and the stream ran
heavy and turbid below the garden, so that the ford was



Digitized by



Google



THE BLUE BONNET 165

ill to cross. The Prince's final triumphing then seemed
surer than her own. Charles had been away now a long
while. He had not been assiduous about her for many
months before his departure to join the Prince. He had
sent her no message first or last. She had even heard
of another lady. ...

For rumours flew. The news of the brief Stuart
apotheosis at Edinburgh, tidings of the Prince's meteoric
Court at Holyrood, had filtered down to Redmire, and
the bar of the inn there. Preston fight, too, was men-
tioned. She thought, but was not sure, that Charles had
been noticed there. Now the Prince was marching
south . . . had marched. . . .

On that day of December, mild and calm and presage-
less as it seemed, Christina was ill at ease, peevish,
apprehensive. She went about the houseplace and
courtyard with her ears pricked to the free roving wind
that might have brushed her Charles's bonnet in pass-
ing, as he marched south with his troops? Or, weary of
this fairy listening, she would droop her eyes, till they
rested dreaming on the waterway below the dip of the
hill where Wallburn Hall stood. Then she would raise
them slowly to look a little higher on the level where the
turrets of Scanwood were just visible nestling in their
encompassing woods. Scanwood was a fine place, and
would it be hers some day ?

Puzzled, like a fox that is hunted, she snuffed the air
and could not tell which way danger, or perhaps bliss,
might come. Had the Prince's army passed them on
its way south? For indeed the last news Luke had
brought had been that the Stuart heir was marching
on his own capital, with his victorious rabble of High-
landers. King George was quaking. Would not
Charles, if this were so, have to pass by Scanwood to



Digitized by



Google



166 TALES OF THE UNEASY

see to his domestic concerns ? Her mother babbled for
ever of drums; the old woman would have it that she
heard them. ...

"They've gone by, my dear, they've gone by. Oh,
the bonny lads ! . . . The Prince has gone into Eng-
land, never to leave it again, dearie. Listen to the old
doited woman, for she speaks truth. Rub-a-dub ! . . .
Rub-a-dub! . . ."

" Whisht, whisht, mother ! " Christina now and again
murmured softly but not imperatively, as she stood by
the window and herself with her slight long fingers
performed the manoeuvre known as drumming on the
pane. Yes, her heart lifted ; he had passed, at a point
perhaps miles away, too far for him to get leave to call
in and see his sweetheart. She must have patience.
One day soon she would be looking out of this very
window and she would see Charles on his fine horse
crossing the ford at the old place, coming to her, with a
light heart, and all his troubles and hers behind him,
cast aside, healed, over and done with. She could
discern the very spot now where the bottom was nearest
and the water shallowest, even exposed at times in
drought. The waters flowed glumly over it now, there
had been much rain to swell them. Sometimes, to the
excited girl, who stood there, her nerves wrought by
the faint vfoal rub-a-dubbing that came from the bed
behind her, it seemed that the water gathered itself up
into shapes — shapes of horses and men. The little
waves seemed to rise obediently under the harsh wind,
and form themselves into the semblance of uncanny
humanity. They massed themselves and menaced, yes,
she came to fancy that one figure rose again and again
from the sullen flow to shake a quivering fist at her.
She stared the silly vision down. Soon the water ran



Digitized by



Google



THE BLUE BONNET 167

by as usual, huddling, lumping itself into small ridges
under the wind, but nothing so tall as a man.

She turned to receive and divert the mother's peevish
voice. The old woman had ceased to imitate the drums ;
she was now convinced in her senile way they had
passed. She talked strange nonsense, used strange
names. "Bound for the South, they are. . . . The
Bridge. . . . Swarkstone ! Swarkstone."

"Where's that, mother?"

"Bad luck! Bad luck! The Bridge. ... No
further. . . . Swarkstone. No further. Back ! Back !
I'm cold, Christina. I'm cold. . . ."

"The day's changing and you feel it," said Christina
sadly, altering the position of the coverings. It was
all she could do.

"Nay, 'tis the smit of death I've got, Christina! I
know it."

"Oh, mother, not now, just when we are going to
be so happy." But her heart did not back her words.
"Look here, I'll have Luke go to Redmire at once and
get you some of Betty Candlish's cordial. She promised
me some for you the moment I wanted it, and you seemed
low as you do to-day. We won't let you die just yet."

" Ay, but can you keep me ? " said the voice from the
bed gently. "It's that I've got and no mistake. I've
felt it all day. . . . Come back and kiss me, Christina.
You're a good girl — a very good girl. . . . The Bridge
at Swarkstone — I saw him there — the Prince. . . .
Remember that, Christina."

"Yes, mother, I will, though I never heard of such
a place in my life ! " cajoled the girl as she went down-
stairs to seek the half-witted Luke and confide her errand
to him.

He sat, as usual, on the oak settle, swallowed up in



Digitized by



Google



168 TALES OF THE UNEASY

the glooms of the chimney corner. She roused him up,
and told him what she wanted. She helped him to
saddle the pony and watched him potter slowly up the
hill towards Bolton. Then she re-entered the house and
cut up, on the corner of the big seamed oaken table,
some vegetables which she had fetched from an outhouse.
Into a pot on the fire she threw the sliced turnips and
carrots. There was not much fire to hang over, but
her forehead got hot, her cheeks flushed, and her hair
escaped a little from its binding.

Presently, having put the mess to one side on the hob,
she walked slowly out into the courtyard to get air, of
which she suddenly felt a violent need. She languidly
ascended the few broken steps that led up to the old
battlement. At that time one could still walk along it
without having one's attention too much distracted by
the necessity of picking one's way among the rubble.
She strolled backwards and forwards, enjoying the fresh
moorland air that caressed her reddened cheeks and blew
her pale yellow hair away in an easterly direction.

Holding her hand to her forehead instinctively to
restrain it, though there was no one to be seen for miles,
she scanned the country to the south. Her blue eyes
roved over the low rolling hills that let her see a very
long way. But not as far as that bridge at Swarkstone,
six miles south of Derby, where the lines of her fate had
been converging for several days past, and were now
radiating away from thence in ragged streaks and strands
of fugitive soldiers and brutal complacent pursuers.

She was overcome with a sudden trepidation, a rush
of feeling that somehow impelled her to get back to the
room where her mother lay, and see for herself how
the helpless woman was getting on. But she sat down
on the parapet, which at the point where she was still



Digitized by



Google



THE BLUE BONNET 169

stood firm at the side of the battlement next the road.
Overcome by a sudden faintness, she hid her face in
her hands. She had eaten very little to-day. Her back
was to the road, and her eyes, should she uncover them,
would have rested on the empty grass-grown courtyard.

It was not empty. A noise like a dead leaf twisting
startled her. Luke come back on foot, without the
pony ! She had pressed her knuckles into her eyes until
her eyes had grown hazy and suffused, and it was a
second or two before she saw there was actually a man in
the courtyard below her. A man, not Luke. . . .

His bonnet, faded by sun and wind and rain, had once
been blue. She heard his breath that came quickly,
and, very drily, scenting a beggar and a demand for
alms, she asked him his business.

He raised his drooping head.

"Charles!"

"Christina, quick! Who else is here? Can you
harbour me ? "

"What? What?" .

"I come from Derby — the rout at Derby. We got six
miles beyond and turned back. ... I am pursued.
Quick, can you hide me, will you ? They will search
my house at Scanwood, they are there now. . . ."

Christina was not looking at him. She had half turned
when he spoke of Scanwood, and her eyes pried into the
bosky mazes lying between. . . . The fugitive thought
that the brusque movement had its occasion in a natural
change in her sentiments towards himself. He deserved
no better, he had practically deserted her, he had never
written — a woman scorned ! . . . Yet in his urgent
necessity he must needs appeal to her again. . . .

"Christina, an answer, I beg of you! Shall I go
further for a shelter ? "



Digitized by



Google



170 TALES OF THE UNEASY

"Take off that cap — reach it up to me here. Now go
in to the chimney corner — you know it — sit down — at
ease. Not another word."

While speaking she had taken the blue cap and flung
it down into the chapel garth on the other side of the
wall. The cluster of "ramps " and fronds of wild garlic
parted and opened to receive it and came together again.
Meantime such was the power of insistence in her voice
that the fugitive obeyed her as he would obey the military
word of command. Heavily walking over the stones of
the courtyard, he took his place on the settle in the
chimney nook and crossed his legs negligently. He
could still see Christina standing on the battlement look-
ing down towards the ford. She stood first on one leg
and then on the other ; she agitated her body strangely,
she made signs. Then faint sounds, voices, the clink
of bridles, came to his ears from the direction in which
she looked. His pursuers most likely, for the noise
came from Scanwood. He stretched his legs, stiff from
two nights' exposure, further out in an attitude of ease
as she had bidden him. He did not know what
Christina meant to do. She was revengeful — then she
would give him up? She meant perhaps to save him?
Well, his life belonged to her. He waited.

Five minutes ago Christina had seen his enemies
taking the ford, a well-found troop of horse, and a
stoutish personable man riding at their head. Charles
Daunet, from the ingle nook, could not see them but
he could see his Christina make a trumpet of her white
hands and hear her bawl — yes, bawl — to them over the
battlement —

"Good gentlemen, hear me. Will you please to take
some refreshment ? I cannot allow you to go by me, for
it is lonely here at Wallburn Hall."



Digitized by



Google



THE BLUE BONNET 171

"Is that what you call it?" said a clear voice.
"Wheel, men."

Charles Daunet saw the speaker ride into the little
courtyard at the Head of his troop, and dismount. He
was a fine florid man of forty or so. He wore a high
fixed cap with upon it the White Horse of Hanover;
his gaiters were white and at his saddle he carried a
dead turkey. Christina had descended from the battle-
ment, and had gone to the horse's head. The man
spoke breezily.

"Captain Butler at your service, Mistress. We will
eat a crust with you, the more go because we come to
search you in the King's name."

" Do you say so ? " Christina replied, setting the tone
of the interview in a way that made Charles Daunet
shiver. "Come you then in, in the King's name.
George or James, 'tis all the same to me, a woman. It's
long enough since a man came this way. I was wearying
for the sight of one."

The Captain laughed heartily.

"Business, first, Miss, if you please. We have a
warrant to take a certain Colonel Charles Daunet of
Scanwood, who fought for the Pretender at Preston and
gave us honest ones a dance of it."

Christina looked faintly bored.

" My cousin of Scanwood ! Is he not at home ? "

"We have spent two hours ferreting for him there,
and the housekeeper bade us come here. She said he
was a good friend of yours."

"She is chary of her information," said the girl com-
posedly. "I was more than friend, I was once sweet-
hearts with him, for my sins. But I have no care for
the fellow now." She tossed her head. "Come in, come
in, you and your men, as many as the roof will shelter.



Digitized by



Google



172 TALES OF THE UNEASY

The wine cask is low, but we will do what we can. I
am alone here — nearly."

" My men — some of them — must search the house."

" Ay, let them search closely 1 I was always one
for formality. But see they take heed of the flooring
of the upper rooms, which is indifferent and might let
one of them through, especially if he be a fine man like
yourself, Captain 1 " She giggled. "Shall I go along
with them, and indicate the places where the maggots
cling and the mouse gnaws, and all is gone to fine
powder ? "

"No, they must shift as best they can, and you shall
stay here and talk with me. Our man should be here,
without your knowledge, perhaps, since you say you
and he have fallen out ? "

"We fell out," said Christina carelessly, "when he
chose to leave me to go and fight for a man I had never
seen and didn't care for. He should have stayed here
and taken care of his own."

"I am with you, Mistress. Little as he is, though, he
fought us like the devil at Preston. His blue bonnet
was everywhere, and he fairly swinged our poor fellows 1
The Duke is wild to have him strung up. Well, men,
off with you 1 Thoroughly, mind. Every corner ! Is
there a cursed hiding hole here ? "

"Yes, in my mother's room," said the hostess
languidly. "She lies there bedridden. Speak her fair
and gently, and she will instruct you to find the way in.
On the left-hand side of the fireplace — a bolt shaped like
a beetle. Only it's iron, and if Charles is there — so
much the worse for him."

"You've got a spirit — nasty at that. Well, let's in.
'Tis hot, and your liquor comes not amiss."

Christina led the way under the low-browed doorway



Digitized by



Google



THE BLUE BONNET 173

to the kitchen, where Charles Daunet was sitting. She
made straight for the corner where he was, and lifting
up a wooden flap of the settle, rummaged for a bottle
of spirits. Aloud she said —

"Get thy great foot out of the way, Luke, wilt 'a ! "

"Ay, who's that?" asked Captain Butler, apprehend-
ing the sullen inmate of the chimney corner for the first
time.

"That! That's a poor foolish cousin of mine," she
replied, rising from her knees with the bottle, a little
flushed with stooping. . . .

"You seem full of cousins "

"Yes, but this one's on the wrong side of the blanket.
He's not over quick, but he'll answer a civil question,
no doubt. Now then ! " She took Charles Daunet
roughly by the wounded shoulder, and he winced.
"Look up, speak to the captain, can't you ? "

"What's your name?" asked that personage humor-
ously, entering into the spirit of the thing, but he got no
answer. Christina shrugged her shoulders.

"Truth, he's got no name, by the rights of it. Or
if he has, it's the same as mine. Luke Daunet, at your
service. Drat you, Luke, why don't you stand up and
speak for yourself ? "

Still the man on the settle did not move.

"He's taken that way sometimes, Captain. A fit of
the sullens. As obstinate as a mule, and you can't get
a word out of him ; and another day he'll rattle away fit
to deave you. Poor sort of company for a girl like me !
We just have to give him house room and a bite and a
sup now and then for kinship's sake."

She poured out a glass of mead and the captain took
up the glass and raised it to his lips.

"A kiss before I drink!"



Digitized by



Google



174 TALES OF THE UNEASY

He put his hand on her shrinking shoulder. The
kiss lit on her ear. The man in the corner looked up
sharply.

"Be quiet, Luke. Don't you see I never gave it?"
she said, as if to a froward jealous baby.

" It isn't to his taste, eh ? " said Butler. " Ha ! Ha ! "

"Never you mind his tantrums, Captain. We never
take any notice, mother and I." She filled his glass
again. He sat down near the end of the table. She
made shift to sweep the fragments of vegetables away
with the carroty knife, but the captain raised his hand.

"Let be ! " he said. . . . "Come and sit here, if this
surly fellow will permit it. I shall like to watch his
face." He put his burly arm out, and, not before she
knew what she was doing, proud Christina Daunet was
sitting on a trooper's knee and playing with his beard.

There was a sound of feet and much stamping over-
head. Presently, with a sharp ugly crash of splintering
timber, the booted leg of one of Butler's men came
through the ceiling and dangled helplessly. Christina
jumped off the captain's knee and burst out laughing.

"There ! I told you 'twould happen."

"Bravo, Tim Jobling ! I'd know his leg in a
hundred. Gad, I can hear him squealing like a pig up
there ! "

" 'Tis in my mother's room ! " exclaimed Christina
suddenly. " 'Twill frighten her to death."

"You shan't go till they come down. They'll be here
directly. Look you, it's all right now. Tim Jobling
has gotten back his leg. They have him by the
shoulders, and hoist him up so. He's still swearing,
though I can't hear. You shall hear me roast him."

Christina did not sit on his knee again, but leaped
away with a coquettish grimace as the members of the



Digitized by



Google



THE BLUE BONNET 175

search party came downstairs. Sheepishly came Tim
Jobling at the tail of the group, minded to avoid Butler's
merriment.

"Found naught, Cap'n, except one doited old woman
in bed."

" My mother ! " interposed Christina proudly.

"Ay, Walters, keep a civil tongue in your head, it
can do you no harm. Did you put your blade thro*
the bed?"

"We did, ay, and the old body sat up, and talked
gibberish. She frightened poor Tim so that he stepped
back sharp and through the flooring."

"His leg came out just there," said Butler, pointing
to the comminuted fracture of laths and planks that
sagged down from the ceiling. "Well, Tim, you're no
worse and you've given me and my young lady here
very good amusement. Your leg wagged like a mouse's
tail in the trap. My word ! . . . Well, well, there's
meetings and there's partings, Mistress. . . . We'll
have to be jogging away. Our man's still to seek.
What's this place Redmire?" He spoke to Christina,
taking her by the chin.

" It's a lost sort of place, three miles away from here.
Marske's a deal more likely. Yet why should I be help-
ing you to catch the poor escaped fellow ? You'll hang
him, I'll warrant, and though he's despised me, I don't
wish him that much harm. I was never fond of telling
the hunt which way the fox had gone."

"Do you say so?" He looked judicial, and stroked
his beard. After a pause — "Still, I'll just have the
correct name of that last place you mentioned. . . .
You've no call to be careful for Charles Scan wood, he's
given you the go-by, you say. A man merits a rope for
neglecting a pretty wench, over and above being



Digitized by



Google



176 TALES OF THE UNEASY

punished for the hell he gave us all at Preston. That
blue bonnet of his was like the clout of the devil him-
self. Well, well, adieu. Thank you for your mead, and
if ever I'm this way again- "

"Go, since go you will," said she, "I shall see or
speak to no man but you here this side of Lady Day.
So, Captain, farewell. Grant me a favour?"

"Ask it."

" My cousin, here "

"Sulky-face! Ay."

"He's got business for me in Marske. The ford's
swollen. We have no horse. Let him ride behind one
of your men so far? You're going to Marske to look
for Scanwood ? "

"Certainly, Miss, we'll oblige you. Tim Jobling
shall take him behind. Come, men, saddle. We must
be off."

"Give me a letter — so that the next company passes
this way don't trouble me," she said.

He scribbled something in a pocket-book, and tore it
out. She took it.

" Another glass before you go ? "

"I'll not say no to that. Here's to King George!
Will you toast him ? "

She drank it down.

"Just a good excuse to get a drink," she said.

" Right. Women have no call to meddle with politics.
And your cousin ? "

"You can try him. But I fear he's stubborn. These
sullen fits last for days. Here, Luke, drink to please me
and the kind captain."

She held the cup to his mouth and whispered, "Return
here as soon as may be."

Aloud she sneered, " Look you, the great baby ! He



Digitized by



Google



THE BLUE BONNET 177

is suffering me to spill the good liquor. His lips are
close shut "

"Waste no more time on the lout that will not drink
when a lady begs him," th^ captain said. He wiped his
lips. "Well, good-bye, then. . . . You were so glad
to see me, you'll not refuse me a kiss at parting ? "

"What are you thinking of, Captain Butler?" she
minced affectedly. "And before your men, too."

"Be hanged to my men ! They're busy getting off.
You're the prettiest picking I've seen since I left my
barracks at Hounslow and I cannot leave it unkissed ! "

He forced her lips. The man in the chimney corner
stirred.

"Touches him nearly," said Butler, whose eyes shone.
... "I could do with another, given freely. Maybe,
if we were alone "

She shook her head.

"No good, eh? Your promise, Madam, was finer
than your performance. But I'm a gentleman. Come,
my lob-lie-by-the-fire, stump up ! "

The man in the ingle nook, with one reproachful
glance at Christina, rose. He tottered a little, and
appeared dazed. Captain Butler, in sudden haste to
be gone, clapped him on the* back.

"Come, my little fellow, don't keep us waiting.
We're bound to catch our gallows-bird before dark ! "

The haggard eyes of the fugitive were fixed now on
Christina, and now on the stained kitchen knife that
lay on the table.

" It's the money," she said hastily. " I was forgetting."

Opening a shabby little leather bag that hung at her
girdle, she produced a silver coin.

"Here, take it, Luke. For all that Betty Candlish
would have given us credit. There goes ! Don't drop



Digitized by



Google



178 TALES OF THE UNEASY

it, ye daft goner il ! And, mind, you'll have to come
back by the bridge up Marske way, for these kind gentle-
men won't be coming back, I fancy. It's saving him
a matter of two miles, Captain, thanking you kindly, and
my mother pining for her drops."

The troopers in the yard were all mounted now, their
bridles clinking, their horses pawing. Christina, stand-
ing by Captain Butler's stirrup, bickering with him
gaily to the last, watched her lover out of the corner of
her eye, as he doggedly passed out, and hoisted himself
up behind the man called Tim. He seemed woefully
stiff. Christina supposed him to have a hurt somewhere,
or was it merely the result of two nights' exposure?
If it was the former, she promised herself a month's
delicious nursing. Yet not a look did he cast in her
direction as he rode away, uncovered, leaving one of
Luke's old caps, which she had reached down from a
nail for him, on the table beside the kitchen knife and
the carrot scrapings.

She saw it when she went in again. His negligence
of any head covering must have looked odd and in-
different, but then his sullen and cross demeanour had
tallied exactly with her account of him. She was proud
of the part she had played.

Yet the first thing she did when the sounds had died
away was to catch up a rough cloth, not over clean,
that lay there, and rub her lips with it till the blood came.

Then she* sat down for a little while with her head
buried in the self-same cloth, crouching low in shame,
remembering bitterly the indignities to which she had
submitted in order to secure her false lover's safety.

Half an hour she sat like this. TJien the ol"d clock in
the corner struck wheezily. It was three o'clock in the
afternoon.

She remembered her mother. She ought to go and



Digitized by



Google



THE BLUE BONNET 179

see and comfort the old woman. Perhaps the rough
troopers had frightened her. Heavy-footed, hating
herself, loving Charles, she ascended the crazy stairs.
The troopers had frightened her mother indeed. She
was dead ! . . .

The daughter, dry-eyed, left alone with death, did
what was necessary. She washed the body of her be-
loved, and dressed it, and laid her arms across her breast
with a little sprig of marjoram out of her garden between
the fingers, and covered up the cracked dim looking-
glass with a fair white cloth. She went downstairs and
procured a plateful of salt, which she laid on the dead
wonjan's chest to fend off the evil spirits. She drew
down the blinds of the windows that looked out over the
garden on to the ford, and sat down near the horribly
yawning hole in the flooring to await Luke — or Charles.
Neither of them might come for a good hour or more.
She did not know which would be the first. Charles
might not come for days, but when he did he would be
of good comfort, and grateful to her for saving his life
at the expense though it were of half an hour's desperate
but not irremediable degradation. It was nothing to
her, considering the result, perhaps as little to him, and
yet more than once during the ordeal she had fancied
he was on the point of interposing and forbidding, at
the risk of his life, the desecration of the lips that were
his, and his only. He might not, perhaps, be willing
to kiss her. ... No matter, she would dress his wound,
and shelter him and be a mother, not a mistress, to
him a while. He had not slept in a bed, nurse-tended
by kind white hands, since Preston fight. ... He would
kiss the hands sometimes ? ... So she dreamed. . . .

About five o'clock she heard the thud of a horse's
hoofs, trotting briskly towards her from the ford.



Digitized by



Google



180 TALES OF THE UNEASY

Charles had been in luck, and had somehow or other
managed to get hold of a horse ? . . .

She ran down, leaping, in her haste to go the nearest
way, over the gaping chasm that shelved in like the
hangman's drop, in the middle of the floor.

" My beloved!"

A man stood, sheepish, in the house place. It was
Captain Butler.

"You ! " she stammered, and reeled.

"Yes, 'tis I, poor fool, come back to know more of
you and your wiles, my beauty. For that you are; and
may be, now that I've given my men the slip for an
hour, you'll let me have that kiss ? "

Christina was holding on to the high back of the settle.

"Ay, there's no doubt about it, you're a gay piece,
and no one could call you kissing shy. 1 like it. But
that poor lad who sat there — he couldn't stomach so
much freedom, I fancy. You made his poor heart ache,
and lost him his wits, now, wasn't it? . . . Well, well,
he's the best judge of his own feelings, may be he's as
well out of this troublesome world. . . ."

"What do you mean, Captain?"

"Only that that cousin of yours slipped off from be-
hind Tim Jobling crossing the ford, and was washed
away almost before we in the front knew what was
happening. It's my belief he did it on purpose."

"Drowned! Charles!"

"Is that his silly name? I thought you mentioned
some other. He said something to Tim, I believe,
before he let go "

"What was it?"

"Oh, if you care to hear ! He said that he found the
woman he loved was no better than a harlot, and he
didn't care for his life any more since 'twas so. He just
slipped off behind "



Digitized by



Google



THE BLUE BONNET 181

"And didn't any one lift a finger to help him?" she
wailed.

"Couldn't, I tell you, he was a deal too quick for Tim,
seeing as he did it o' purpose. No, Miss, make no bones
about it, his death lies at your door."

She tottered, and he held out a clumsy hand.

"Come, put it all behind you. Why should a fine
girl like you sorrow for a half-witted yokel like that?
You broke his heart, but what right had he to cast those
bleary eyes of his on you? You are for a better than
he. Come now — be pleasant ! You didn't use to look
bashful. One would think it was a different woman I've
come back to. You're handsome enough, though, in all
conscience, even with that face of thunder on you. Will
you or won't you, Mistress Daunet? Will you come to
me — my pretty ? "

He took a pull at the stoup of liquor that was where
he had put it down, and held out his arms.

Still the woman stood, dazed, dumbfounded, her
ordinarily quick brain acting slowly. She began to*
realize, by a series of successive shocks, that there was
no one left to be helped or saved by diplomacy. She
kept her distance, still eyeing the dark wet knife on the
table. . . . She spoke at last, sombre, taciturn. . . .

"My mother lies dead upstairs."

"Does she so? Well, 'twas her time to die, wasn't
it? We'll bury her decently. Come."

He sat there, glorying in his work, his legs well apart,
smiling fatuously, waiting for the fair sulky girl to forget
her immediate griefs and fall on his neck for solace and
comfort.

" Dawdling 1 Playing the maiden, eh? You'll come
in the end. What if your mother is dead? Eighty, I
think she was? Trooper Tim gave her a fright.
Finished her off. . . ." He was slightly drunk. "I've



Digitized by



Google



182 TALES OF THE UNEASY

left my men at Scan wood. I fancy its master is likely
to seek the old earths after all. . . . Come, still thinking
on your mother? Devil, don't I tell you she was old
and ripe for death? We'll give her Christian burial,
and do all things in order. . . ."

He fumbled in his pockets. And Christina's hand
made a quick outward movement.

"And will you bury me decently too?" said she,
advancing at last. With the dignity of a queen she sat
down on the knee of the amorous captain, who fancied
the hour of surrender had come. Indeed, he had some
small excuse for thinking so, for with a gesture of
abandonment she flung one long arm round his neck.

"Ay, but don't strangle me 1 " he whispered, his chin
buried in. her bare neck. Christina's other hand was
busy at his coat lapel.

She found the place, just over the collar bone — she
had no science but she just happened on it, — and drove
the long kitchen knife in straight. Its work was not
done then. With an effort she drew the knife out and
used it again. Captain Butler, before he fell off the
chair, saw her eyes glazing, and for one moment held
a dead woman in his arms.



"And that, I think, was the way it was," said the
romancer to his patient listener, as they sat together on
the bare hillside sloping to the Bridge on the other side
of the ruined battlement, and let their hands run through
the cool straggling grasses that clothed its sad bleakness
a little. He raised his hand, that had been fumbling
negligently in the ground beside him.

" Look here ! A daffodil ! This must have been poor
Christina Daunet's garden ! "



Digitized by



Google



THE WITNESS



Digitized by VjOOQIC



Digitized byVjOCK?lC



THE WITNESS



I was sitting over my fire in my hut in Penanga Creek,
Wyoming, when the idea came to me — weakly, dreamily,
at first, but later on strongly and vividly, that I must go
home. It was, as I confusedly made it, seven years since
I left Europe. I felt the thing that had driven me forth
less keenly, and I realized that in seven years things must
have quieted down a bit. Sally, too, being of a cheerful,
easy-going make, would have forgotten what had hap-
pened on that one night, since in the nature of the case
there could have been no discovery, no scandal.

No one could have known anything about it, no one
had witnessed her act except Roger, my dog, who now
lay so quietly, numb with advancing age, between my
feet in front of the fire. Roger had been only a year old
on that short summer night, a clumsy, flopping puppy
that followed me unsteadily, swaggering from side to
side, down the garden path of the old haunted manor
house where Sally James lived., It was flagged with
broad white stones, and the gate of it opened straight
on to the road that led to. Durham, to Darlington, and
to the other ends of the earth, where I am now.

I ran away, like a coward, and yet not a coward, for I
loved Sally James and I knew too much. I turned at the
gate, and I gazed back at the windows of the house with

185



Digitized by



Google



186 TALES OF THE UNEASY

their close-drawn blinds. I thought they looked like
eyelids let down over anxious dreams. I saw the one
window in the oldest part of the house where Sally, half
dressed, was peeping through the blind, annoyed, yet
uncomplaining at my departure. She knew men; she
thought I was just going to put my head under the pump,
and freshen my aching brain and my eyes that had looked
on so much since they closed in sleep the night before.
Then after a walk over the common, with my dog at my
heels, I should return to her, stay with her through the
long years to come, and profit by her crime. She had
rid me of a nuisance. She did not realize — how could
she, being hard Sally James ? — that I could not bear the
thought of seeing her face again. She was so careless of
other people's feelings that she knew less of what I felt
than the siUy young dog who slunk at my heels — or the
pert robin that perched on the cheek of the gate-post.
The robip, with its head on one side, seemed to stare at
me and leer horribly as I closed the gate behind me, and
went out into the world for ever. I never meant to see
Sally again, I never meant to write or receive a letter; I
never meant to look at a newspaper again ; I never meant
to know if she were tried for murder or not. I only knew
that I did not mean to chance having to bear evidence
against her.

There was very little likelihood of that. Mrs. James,
the bouncing, jolly widow and my secret love, had saved
money left her by her late husband and had managed to
buy the freehold of Dewlap Hall, an old manor house
that had seen better days. It had been one of the homes
of the Conyers family, but it was now little more than a
forlorn, dejected farmhouse, standing alone in a couple
of acres about three miles out of Durham. It looked
even a better place than it was. Once you were inside



Digitized by



Google



THE WITNESS 187

you saw that its ruin was only a question of time. It was
slowly crumbling, festering, powdering away. Half the
rooms were unsafe, the walls of the others were shored
up, partitioned off, reduced to a fourth of their original
size. One floor was taken bodily away — I have been told,
to lay the ghost. The sharp, jagged rafters sagged down-
wards from the sides. The floor of this room was
cobbled, it had lancet windows : people said it was the
old chapel. Sally used the place as a wash-house; it
opened out of her kitchen, which was the old and only
hall of the first house. That, Mr. Wilson the vicar had
told us, was built in the time of Edward II. Of course
the house was haunted. ^ A grey lady. Sally's bedroom,
above, must have been taken off the whole top of the hall,
the floor was very bad, and though originally it must
have been a handsome-sized, airy and pleasant room in
spite of its low ceiling, the late owner had mistrusted the
eastern portion of it so much that he had walled it off
with boards and some concrete, calmly reducing the best
bedroom to a cell about ten feet square.

It was big enough for two people, for Sally and me,
drunk with love. I believe Sally and I would have made
love if we had been fastened in a barrel studded with
nails, and rolled down to the sea. But not room enough
for three.

On that night,. Sally and I, absorbed in each other,
had not heard the heavy druhkard's footfall of my wife
on the creaking steps of the staircase that led up from
the house place below, and the sound of the door of the
room where we were, being slowly pushed open. The
heavy bolt that should by rights have gone across it, was
lying on the wicker chair by the bed. Sally, in her wild
confidence in the impossibility of molestation in this
lonely part of the country, had omitted to run it into the



Digitized by



Google



188 TALES OF THE UNEASY

thole holes on either side of the lintels, as usual. When
you did that you made the chamber into a real castle of
strength, but she had forgotten all but me.

And poor mad Mary, my wife, stood like the ghost of
Dewlap Hall, and watched us. Sally, half dazed, may
have thought that she was the ghost. . . .

Anyway, she struck out with the heavy iron bar that
lay ready to her hand. She was strong. Hardly another
woman could have wielded it. My dog Roger looked up
from where he slept, crouched on my coat at the foot of
the bed on Sally's packing-box. . . .

The iron bar was immensely weighty, my poor old
wife fell like a log. Roger turned up his eyes. ... I
said, "Down, Roger ! " and Roger lay down. Though
a mere puppy, he was well trained.

Sally dropped the bar, with a loud clang on the floor.
There was nobody below to hear it. It lay there, till seeing
my eyes fixed on it, she picked it up easily and replaced
it on the chair without even looking at it. But there
was no blood or even hairs on it, I could have told her,
for I had got hold of Mary by that time, and felt her, and
I was perfectly sure that she had been stunned — killed
outright. So far as I could see, the skin was not even
broken. Her clumsy straw hat was of course smashed,
battered in, and her very thick black hair lay like a mat
over the crown of her head.

Sally asked me if she were dead, and I answered, yes,
stone dead. Sally shrugged her shoulders, as who should
say, It's fate. Then without blinking, she put a petticoat
on over her nightgown, and drew the strings of it tightly
round her waist till I should have thought they would
have cut her, but I expect she didn't feel much at that
particular moment. At least, I didn't. I kept my eyes
on her all the time ; I thought it might prevent me from



Digitized by



Google



THE WITNESS 189

going mad. And Sally was sure to know what to do.
It was her murder. . . .

It was a very warm night, and getting on for two
o'clock, I should have thought, but no light pierced
through the pieces of red gingham that Sally had hung
up and gathered into a curtain for the window.

I watched Sally. She came up to me and took hold of
Mary's feet, and then dropped them again after I had
taken the corpse by the shoulders. She stood a moment,
a bit mazed, then she thought of the bar and went to it
where it lay on the chair by the bedside. She lifted it,
and examined its iron surface. . . .

" Give it to me," I said. I stupidly thought of burn-
ing it.

" Nonsense ! " Sally said, quite sharply, wiping it on
her nightgown and replacing it on the chair. "Let it
stay there where it always lies. Old Betty is used to
the sight of it."

She was wise. She returned to me and my burden.
She took hold of Mary's feet again, and didn't drop them
this time, but tied a towel round her ankles, thus binding
them firmly together. Then, both of us breathing
heavily, we got the body down the stairs. I went first.
I could not see Mary's face, but I saw Sally's, and her
lips were red, and tightly primmed. Roger, clumsily
trying to pass us and our burden on the narrow flight of
steps, got under our feet and nearly threw us down, and
she unclosed her lips to swear at him. If she had not
spoken, I believe I should have dropped.

We laid Mary on the stone-flagged kitchen floor, while
Sally fumbled with the latch of the wash-house. There
was a door out of that into the back yard, and thence into
a little orchard, and out of that into the wood which
stretched away towards Finchale Priory at the back of



Digitized by



Google



iqo TALES OF THE UNEASY

the house to the north. It was conveniently full of old
abandoned pit shafts. I knew that well enough. But it
was not until we gained the door of the wash-house that
it occurred to me what Sally meant to do, and had mean t
to do from the moment w r e first lifted Mary to bring her
downstairs.

There was a little more light now, but still it was "hot
light enough to see, and I hoped it would not be until we
got into the shelter of the woods. Sally held the feet, as
before. She swung a lantern by a string from her teeth,
she had refused to let me carry it. Sally had not much
faith in me at the best of times, and now when so much
depended on it, I could see that she meant to see to every-
thing herself. Roger followed us; he was very humble
and submissive since Sally had spoken to him so
roughly.

She swore again, but not at him, for he kept out of her
way. It was when the long brambles caught the hem of
her nightgown that hung below the petticoat. Her eyes
flashed a little now and then in the light of the swinging
lantern. ...

"I can hardly walk, I've got the bloody hem of my
shift so wet," she said, roughly.

"Can you manage?" I asked, speaking very faint.
She had said "bloody"!

" Yes. Good thing it's dew, not blood, after all ! "
she reassured me. "Don't talk. I've no breath for
talking. My word ! I sweat, and no mistake ! "

I didn't want to talk. I was thinking of Mary, slung
between us, dead as dead. And the last time I saw her
she was dead drunk in the streets of Cardiff, reeling
about, carrying on her trade. There was no need, that
was the shame and disgrace. I was earning good wages
at Neath as a colliery man, and gave her her fair share.
But she had always taken too much and never been



Digitized by



Google



THE WITNESS 191

respectable, not even when I married her. They say those
two things go together, and luckily there were no children.
As soon as I found out what she was up to, I left her,
deserted her, people would say, and drifted to Durham.
That was full two years ago.

How did she find out that I had come to Durham, and
was working at the Elvet pit ? I never wrote to her once.
How did she know I was living with Sally James in her
house three miles out of Durham ? How had she tracked
me ? I could not tell, then, and I don't know now !

I was wondering, wondering, and the undergrowth
grew thick and the nut boughs lashed my cheek in .the
dark. I stumbled a little as we got along with that
between us, and I forgot to keep step with Sally, and she
swore at me for an awkward fool that was giving her, a
weak woman, all the work to do.

We came at last to the old pit shaft Sally and I knew
of, for it had been one of our trysting places in her hus-
band's lifetime. Most of these disused shafts are walled
round with brick, but this one wasn't, for some reason or
other. It was carelessly staked round with wattle, wait-
ing to be done properly, I suppose. A drunken man
could easily fall in and no one be any the wiser. For a
pit shaft is so deep that you can see the stars in the
daylight.

Mary must have walked all the way from Cardiff. It
was the first time I felt sorry for her. I had been till then
so angry with her for coming ferreting and spying, that
if you had asked me, I should have said I was glad she
had got her deserts. But I could not help seeing the worn
soles of her shoes as we heaved her over the edge of the
hole, and they were fairly walked through. I felt sorry
for her then.



Digitized by



Google



192 TALES OF THE UNEASY

Mary was gone, without sticking or any awkwardness,
and Sally breathed hard. She put out her hand and
fondled Roger.

" Good dog ! " she said. " He never barked. He won't
tell tales of us, will he, pet ? "

Roger licked her hand, as an answer to her question.
He was even at that age a wonderfully bright, intelligent
dog.

Then Sally stooped, and tried to pick the long bramble
trail out of the hem of her nightgown. It resisted — it
was hopelessly entangled.

"Stand on it," she said, "while I walk on a bit. One
can always get rid of followers that way."

She alluded to the old superstition that a girl who
attracts the wild wood tendrils will always have plenty of
sweethearts. Her white feet were quite bare. ... I
never knew a hardier woman than Sally. She looked
down into the shaft once, though of course there was
nothing to see, it was too dark and deep down; then
she turned round sharp and decided. . . .

"We had best get back to bed now," she said cheer-
fully. "There's a good piece of night left, and I'm sure
we both need a rest."

I caught her up in my arms, and carried her home, ;t
was only a little bit of a way, no distance at all, though
coming out it had seemed so terribly long. She liked
being carried. Once she put up her mouth and kissed me.
I took her in and set her down in the middle of the
house place. She tottered a little, like a china ornament
when you have been shifting it. She turned to go
upstairs again. I could not manage it.

"Sally," I said, "I think Til go and get a wash."
"Do," she said, "and you can draw yourself some
cider. There's plenty in the barrel in the corner there."



Digitized by



Google



THE WITNESS 193

I watched her ascend the stairs, rather heavily. Then
I whistled my dog. The door of the house stood open,
the dawn was just breaking. I latched it carefully
behind me, and went away down the garden path. I
looked back once — only once. Then I took my resolve
definitely. I have never seen her since.

• ••••••

I secured a passage out West, and we sailed, my poor
dog and I, the very next day. And in my panic I have
never looked at a paper from that day to this. I don't
know whether there was an inquiry or not, or whether
any suspicion fell on Sally ; I should say not, she is too
clever. Of one thing I am quite sure; the body was
never found. They never are when they are lost like
that. I have an idea too that my wife Mary was never
even missed in Cardiff — who cares when prostitutes die
or disappear ? If, as was probable, no one had chanced
to see her approach Dewlap Hall in the early hours of
the morning, then there was absolutely no witness of
Sally's crime except myself and my dog Roger*

Yet, the thought that plagued me all through that
night passes through my mind, and worries me still. I
had deserted Mary — I had not seen nor communicated
with her or any of my old friends in and ne&r Cardiff —
I am a Welshman — for three years !

So how did she know where to find me ? Did she
settle to visit all the great mining centres in turn ? And
did she draw Durham early in the game, and when she
got to Durham, how did she get wind of my living at
Dewlap with Sally James ?

My thoughts, for the last seven years, have not been
pleasant, but they are all the company I have had. I
have worked hard here, I have even had a bit of luck
and been able to lay by a little, but I have hardly



Digitized by



Google



194 TALES OF THE UNEASY

spoken to a single soul. The last man who spent a night
in my cabin was a taciturn Japanese who had less con-
versation than even Roger.

It is killing me. That is why two nights ago I took
up my pen and wrote to Sally. Mrs. James, Dewlap
Hall, near Durham, England. I must see her again.
And to-day I have managed somehow or other to mail
the letter. Now I wait.

• ••••••

I waited a good month. Then there came an answer,
an answer I had ridden in for to Blizzardville every
other day all through the time, speaking to no one
except the clerk at the window of the post office — an
uncommon dull and slow dog he was.

She wrote —

" You wretch ! What a surprise to hear from you !
Have you returned to your senses? I congratulate you.
Your letter seems to mean that you have, and I don't
mind saying how glad I am ! Oh ! George, how could
you walk off like that, and I lying there expecting you
to come back after you had had a wash and a drink to
buck you up. Men always feel these things so much
more than women, at the time. As for me, you'd be
surprised to hear it, but sometimes at nights I feel as
much remorse as you would have me. Only then when
the good daylight comes in at the pane I feel so different,
one would not believe it was the same woman. Morning
thoughts always are more cheerful. You see, I can't
forgive her for coming to dig me and you out in our
happiness. She had nothing more to do with you. She
drank, she sold herself, she got what she deserved, even
if it was me that gave it to her. I saw it all as I lifted
that great bar. She came meddling, and like all meddle-



Digitized by



Google



THE WITNESS 195

some fools, she got what for. If you had considered
it yourself for one moment you never would have left me
like that. But now you have thought it over, and you've
thought better of it, and you are coming back to me I
Come, only come ! All is serene, as I daresay you
know. Nobody bothered. William Dysart fooled about
me a little when you left the field free, but I treated hirn
with a high hand and I am shot of him except for a
lowering look he gives me over the top of his pew, in
Church on Sunday. They say he is my enemy, but
even he can't see to the bottom of a pit shaft, and there's
no evidence. I am respected in the place, and I can
marry any one I please, and when I please. Shan't it
be you, George? Aren't you and I bound by the
memory of that night and what I did to get you ? Come.
Your own wicked, level-headed Sally.

"P.S. — I suppose the dog Roger, who was a puppy
then, has died a natural death ? Poor old dear ! I was
jealous of that dog, I always felt you liked him nearly as
well as you liked me. Peace be to his bones."

Roger looked up at me, as I looked down his way when
I came to that last piece all about him. I believe I read
it aloud softly. I am in the habit of talking to Roger.
He knows perfectly well what one says to him. I stroked
him. " Dead ? Not a bit of it, old dog ! " I said. "We
are all alive and kicking, aren't we? Very well pre-
served, eyes a little bleary perhaps, not many teeth in
our head, but those sound, and that's half the battle."

Roger fawned on me. He is a quiet, taciturn creature,
like his master, and I verily believe the sound of his
own voice has got to scare him almost as much as mine
does me.

"You'll come to England with me, old dog, won't

o 2



Digitized by



Google



196 TALES OF THE UNEASY

you ? You and me'll never be parted ; she must take us
both for better or worse, eh ? "

Roger's tail wagged. He said nothing, but of course
he understood.

I could not have left him, even if I had wanted to,
to die alone in a strange country. Besides, he knows all
about me. He saw it all. I can still see him looking
pensively down into the pit shaft, after. ... He is my
only confidant, for of course I never let on to any one,
I could never risk giving Sally away. But a dog ! Yes,
I am glad he knows.

I could not get ready to leave for about a week, and
before I started I got another letter from Sally. It must
have been written not much more than a day after the
first letter, and there seemed no particular reason why
she should ever have written it. It was rather incoher-
ent. The thought of our meeting again must have
troubled her, must have a little turned her head. She
mixed up all sorts of things in her letter, and mentioned
Roger again three or four times, in connection with
William Dysart, who she seems to fancy has got his

knife into her. A despised lover, but still I began to

fear that the sight of my dog would distress her, remind
her of that awful night, when suddenly and without
thought or premeditation she up and did a sin for me I

What was I to do? It was but woman's nonsense at
the best, and I could not leave my faithful beast to pine
and starve because of a woman's whim ! I consoled
myself with the reflection that a hard, sensible woman
such as Sally had proved herself to be, would not allow
any mere fancy to affect her for long. She would force
herself to get over it, and ignore it as she had the other.
I settled it the way I wanted to and took Roger with me.

I made one tiresome discovery on the way home. I



Digitized by



Google



THE WITNESS 197

was pretty deaf, and could hear very ill unless the
speaker addressed himself especially to me, and general
conversation not at all. This saddened me. Even a
slight deafness makes a man such a nuisance, and I
thought it might put Sally off, or even set her wilful
mightiness against me. Sally was never very patient
at the best of times. You see I thought of everything in
relation to her. Her crime, and her heartlessness and
want of feeling with regard to it, seemed not to affect
my appreciation of her in any way. Indeed, I admired
her devil-may-carishness because it was on the whole
the most decent way for her to behave. I should have
hated her to whine and snivel. . . .

• ••••••

I walked out from Durham one fine Sunday morning
in May, Roger trotting at my heels. I had asked no
questions about Sally and her circumstances. I knew
from her letter that she was well, and moreover I experi-
enced some difficulty in framing questions, or indeed in
getting into conversation at all. I do not believe I spoke
more than two consecutive sentences all the way back,
and those I mumbled in my beard, for all the world
as if I were tongue-tied. No one bothered about me, I
expect I was singularly unattractive, and for the most
part I was left severely alone. I had lost all convivial
habits, I did not care to see or hear anything. I never
looked at a paper, my one idea was to see Sally again.

Roger was not so unsociable. Indeed, my trouble
with him was that he was the reverse. He seemed to be
continually getting into conversations, and eventually
into fights, with other dogs. One dog, a sandy, weedy
terrier, lame of one leg, that we met as soon as we got
out at Durham station, he seemed, after having fought
handsomely with, to take a great fancy to, and the



Digitized by



Google



198 TALES OF THE UNEASY

wretched lame cur chose to follow us all the way out to
Dewlap Hall. It was disturbing, and I should have pre-
ferred to have kept my faithful dog entirely to myself at
a moment like this. I was going to meet the woman I
loved again after all these years. And only Roger
knew what had been.

It was Sunday morning, and I heard bells ringing at
the different churches all the way out. Sally was stand-
ing in the clear morning light, at the low door of her
house close to the monthly rose-bush which stood as
high as she did. There was but one rose on it. She
wore a pink cotton dress. She had grown a little stouter.
She held her hand straight across her forehead, against
the sun which came into her eyes, and made her frown —
or was it the sight of me ? For indeed, her black eye-
brows were cruelly drawn down as Roger and I and
Roger's fjiend came up the flagged path. But all she
said was, as she took her hand away from her face and
laid it in mine —

"Come in."

She pulled me inside, and shut the door in Roger's
face. He set up a whine.

" Poor Roger ! " I said in spite of myself, and my wish
not to annoy her. "Don't you remember him ? "

"Yes, but why did you bring the wretched creature
here? I thought he was dead. I understood you to
say so.' . . ."

She stood there, quaking, quivering with anger. I
had never seen Sally so unmanned. . . .

"Never mind the dog, Sally, — kiss me."

She kissed me, then she said thoughtfully —

" Perhaps, on the whole I had better have him in ? "

She opened the door, and drove away the stranger
dog. Roger she seized, hauling him in by the collar.



Digitized by



Google



THE WITNESS 199

She then carefully bolted the door with one hand, stick-
ing to Roger with the other.

" Have you got a chain ? "

"What for, Sally?"

"To chain him up. I can't have him loose. He's
been talking to that mongrel of Dysart's — I know the
malicious beast — and when dogs get talking together —
now "

"Talking! My dear Sally ! "

"Oh, you know what I mean. It was William Dysart
who directed Mary here that night, or rather morning.
He's longing to get his knife into me — or you."

"But was there an inquiry? I didn't read any of the
papers, I was so afraid of what I might see there . . .
you understand?"

She looked at me narrowly. Then she tossed her head.

"Silly fellow, there was nothing to make you uneasy.
There was not a word of gossip. No one knew. There
was one woman less on the streets of Cardiff, that's all."

" But you said William Dysart directed her here ? "

"Yes, that came out, in a roundabout way, but he
didn't know who she was, or that she didn't just come
here and go straight back again where she came from.
If only you had taken my hint ? "

"What hint?"

"About Roger."

"You do puzzle me, Sally. . . . You only said you
supposed he was dead. Well, he isn't, that's all, and
mighty glad I am of it. And he isn't used to being tied
up, and I'm not going to put upon the old dog now."

"I can't help it. He doesn't go free in my house!
We must talk it over. Meantime. . . ."

She left me abruptly— Sally never dawdled, not even
over a murder. Trailing Roger helplessly by the collar,



Digitized by



Google



200 TALES OF THE UNEASY

she went into the wash-house next door. I followed her
grumbling a little, but still quite her humble slave. She
made his collar more secure and then tied him to the
copper. Then she reached up to a high shelf, and gave
him a handsome plateful of bones and a pat on the head
that had more of monition than of kindness in it. Roger
looked up at me. He seemed to understand the situation
better than I did. "Keep in with her, don't irritate
her ! " he seemed to say. He shivered and seemed cold.

"Tell him to be a good dog and behave himself," she
said to me, "and he shall be loosed to-morrow, if I can
feel quite sure of him. . . . Things are changed a bit,
George, since you were here, and it is easy to see you
have not kept pace with them. We must brush you up,
and bring you up to date. . . ."

She was very nervous. I followed her out of the
wash-house, closing the door behind me, as she bade
me, over her shoulder. In the living-room, she turned
and faced me.

She was a very beautiful woman, was Sally James.
Her white teeth showed keen, as her short upper lip was
drawn up from them. It made her look fine, but a bit
cruel. She was not a very big woman, but stately,
majestic even, at times, though she was only a farmer's
widow and daughter. Just now, as she stood there, her
arms at her sides, her broad breast, covered with pink
print, was like a queen's. She was holding herself in
readiness for my first embrace, and I longed for it too,
and yet — I distrusted her. . . . She was without prin-
ciple, a figure of shifting sand. She would always do
exactly as she liked, and at the moment when she liked.
. . . And she hated my dog.

I invented excuses for her. ...

"It is all association," I thought, as I hung back.



Digitized by



Google



THE WITNESS 201

"She is not so heartless as she seems. The dog was in
the room when it happened, and by the shaft when we
heaved Her over. He reminds her. . . . She has some
feeling. . . ."

My distrust turned all at once to tenderness, and I
sat down on the settle and took her in my arms. She
was very soft and yielding, and she sat meekly on my
knee and kissed me passionately again and again. Then
I kissed her back just the same. The tall clock ticked
as it did on The Night . . . only louder. . . .

There did not seem to be a soul about. I asked Sally
if she had no servant to help her.

"I've a woman — old Betty — do you remember her? —
comes to help me all the week through, but she stays
away on Sundays. The farm hands sleep nearly a
quarter of a mile away. You'll stop to-night, George ? "

I said I would. In my heart I wondered if her room
was still the same, and if I could stand it !



II

A movement in the room awoke me. I opened my
eyes slowly, and in the grey light I put out my hand
and missed Sally. She had left my side.

I put some clothes on and went down the little steep
single stairs, lit only by one dirty, cobwebby window.
The scanty twilight, for that was all it was as yet, slid
in and on to the white lintels, cracked and seamed with
age — I never liked the dawn, when people die. The
moon was paling quietly in the sky. The morning star
still lingered there. At the corner where the stairs turned
sharply, I looked down at my feet and remembered the
job we had to get Mary past it ! Drops of sweat broke



Digitized by



Google



202 TALES OF THE UNEASY

out on my forehead just as they had done then. That
and the dawn f I was very nervous. It was nearly the
same as that other night.

Sally was not in the house place. I stood — turning on
my heels — and wondered where she was. I made no
doubt that she was walking in her sleep — that seeing me
had brought back all the sensations of that dreadful
night, and that she was repeating them. Perhaps she
had remembered the light on the lintel, the turn of the
stair too? . . . What I feared was that she had gone
wandering along the same dreary path through the wood,
as far as the shaft. And then, when she got there,
suppose her remorse was too much for her and she
were mad enough to throw herself over ! . . . Such
things have happened — I had seen The Bells and Mac-
beth. Sally was rather like Lady Macbeth, and Lady
Macbeth, strong-minded as she was, rued her deed, and
walked in her sleep, and rubbed her hands. Sally had
no blood to think about — only dew on the hem of her
nightgown that time. . . . You couldn't tell blood from
dew at night. . . .

I heard a click — something like the sound made by
one earthenware pan rubbing against another, in the
wash-house. ... I had maligned Sally in my thoughts.
She had merely gone downstairs to feed Roger ! The
last remark she had made on going to bed was that he
looked weakly, and on his last legs, and should by rights
be put away before he suffered pain. Dogs die so hard,
she had said. I opened the door that led into the old
stone-paved chapel Sally used as a wash-house, and
stood the beer-casks in.

Sally, in her plain nightgown, was standing there
barefoot on the cobbled stones. She looked a bit
cranky. Her black hair hung partly down her back,



Digitized by



Google



THE WITNESS 203

and in elf locks, that were curls overnight, in her eyes.
She had a great quantity of hair, and out of vanity she
never took it all down when she went to bed, but half
arranged it with pins and coloured ribbons. Her arm
was raised to a high shelf whence she had taken Roger's
provender earlier in the day. The movement made the
fronts of her nightgown gape, and show her breast.

She started when I came in, and dropped her arm
guiltily.

11 Go away, go away ! " she screamed, and put her
hand behind her back. "Go away, and let me finish
the job ! "

"What job, in Heaven's name," I cried, "at this hour
of night? We saw to the dog — no need to feed him
again f "

"Feed him, you idiot! . . . Poison him, more likely
— anything to get him out of the way 1 "

I went up to her and laid my hand on her arm.

" I do believe the sight of Roger, who saw you murder
Mary, has put you clean out of your wits, Sally, my
dear."

"And what about you and your wits, bringing the
beast here ! "

She rushed at poor Roger, who squatted at the extreme
length of his cord, staring at her calmly, boldly, as if
inviting her to stick him with the knife she brandished.
He was never like any other dog. He did not plunge
or bark. I saved him, I took the knife out of her hand,
and flung it into a meal-tub close by.

" Fool, fool ! " she yelled, but I put my hand over her
mouth, and forced her back on the tub, so that she sat
on the knife. I was so sure she was going mad that it
made me calm and strong, and I tried to soothe her and
speak gently to her, as one does to an invalid.



Digitized by



Google



ao4 TALES OF THE UNEASY

"What do you want to kill my poor old dog for,
Sally?"

"I must. I must. He's dangerous."

" Dangerous without a sound tooth in his head ? "

" He has a tongue in his head "

She looked at me narrowly, dragging down the outside
corners of her eyelids like a bulldog. Then she pulled
the fronts of her nightdress to, and tried to speak reason-
ably. She succeeded more or less, but it was a great
effort to her.

"Don't you know what has happened here while you
have been away sulking at the other end of the world ? "
, I said nothing on purpose, so as not to put her back
up. She stood staring at me, waiting for me to say
something. I was so long, she began to shake in the
cold. . . . And Sally never could keep quiet for long.
Her temper broke out and she shouted at me.

"Don't look so stupid, George! . . . God, it sends
me mad ! "

"Dear, try and tell me quietly." I sat down on an
empty barrel. "Come here. Sit on my knee "

She waved me away. She moistened her lips.
"Don't treat me like a child or a madwoman, George.
It is serious, sober earnest. I am telling you facts — not
lies. The police — damn them ! — have got a new weapon,
and they use it for all it is worth. . . ."

She wrung her hands and walked up and down.

"Oh, to think that all this time we have made pets of
these wretched animals, and trusted them — I had a pet
dog once — I put it away because it watched me, though
I wasn't doing anything wrong. Yes, we used to let
them go about with us, and see all we did, and listen
to all we said ! Who minded talking secrets with an
animal in the room, or doing anything one liked in a



Digitized by



Google



THE WITNESS 205

whole farmyard of beasts— then ? We didn't know that
dog of yours was lying at the foot of the bed when Mary
was done for : I never even thought of him f We actually
let him go with us to the edge of the shaft and see us
throw her in ! God, what fools we were ! "

" But what can a dog do, you silly darling ? "

"He can get us hanged! Get us both hanged!
Why, your beast there — the very moment he got into
England he must have learnt his power; he must have
blabbed our whole story, and to that animal of Dysart's,
too, the very last person ! "

I tried to soothe her.

"Sally, my dear, it's awfully cold here! You're
shivering. Do let us get back to bed ! "

I said that, but indeed I was getting to be afraid of
her, in bed or out of it.

She took no notice of me, but went on —

"You never looked at a paper, you tell me, and yet
they were full of it two years ago — the wonderful new
discovery. Since then I've never kndwrt a moment's
peace. My life has been hell. You may thank your stars
you were out of it and had left me to bear the whole
brunt of it,"

" For goodness' sake explain ! " I said crossly.

She came quite close to me and whispered, "The
police ! It's a new dodge of the police. I hate 'em
and their filthy methods ! They get hold of animals —
dogs preferred, because they're more intelligent — and
shut them down there in cellars, behind locked doors, and
then they torture them, rack them. ... George, can
you bear the idea of Roger tortured, racked, — kept wfth-
out water for a week ! Oh, if you had heard, as I have,
scores of times, only I've run away and said nothing
because of my guilty conscience — if you'd heard the



Digitized by



Google



206 TALES OF THE UNEASY

pitiful howls and whines at the back of the police station
there, and knew that some poor helpless beast was being
made to betray and give evidence "

"But I don't see how a dog, or any animal indeed,
could let on to what it knew even if it tried," I said, as
grave as a judge, to papify her.

"Oh, that's a mere matter of detail. The police have
got a code— they manage to communicate with the
beasts. They count the barks "

"Ha! ha! " I laughed.

"Don't dare to laugh, you ignorant fool. Have you
never heard of those spiritualist affairs? The spirits
rap, and the medium tells you what they are saying.
Well, the dog barks — it comes to the same thing "

She sighed deeply and seemed relieved. It was now
quite day. Her candle flared. She was waiting for me
to speak. I was "thinking of what would be the most
soothing thing to say. ... It would not come. I was
at my wits' end. The only thing I could think of was
to get her back to bed and send for a doctor.

I moved slightly in my indecision. She caught my
hand. Hers was very hot.

"George, what are you going to do? I've explained
clearly, haven't I ? "

"Quite." I had now fixed on a plan of action.

"And now, Sally darling," I said softly, "just you
get back to be3, and I'll settle Roger, and then I'll bring
you a nice cup of tea."

That plan failed. She screamed, and beat the air
with her hands.

"Settle him? Not you. It takes a man to do that —
or a woman like me ! No, I know you. You want me to
go quietly, while you untie the dog, and let him go free
to get us hanged — me, at any rate. I murdered Mary —



Digitized by



Google



THE WITNESS 207

you only looked on. And your dog. What'll you get?
I shall swing for it. He's sure to have told Dysart's
dog, and the police '11 get wind of it — Dysart '11 take
care of that. He's only waiting — has been these ten
years. And then they can howk Mary up — what's left of
her — and the damned dog '11 tell them who put her
there."

" Do you suppose Roger would betray us ? " I said,
humouring her. She was crying now, violently, against
my heart.

"But, George — under torture — there is no knowing
what he might do. Is there, Roger?"

She left me, contemptuously, and bending down a
little, spoke to Roger as if he were a human being. That
gave me a turn, and I felt very queer. She seemed so
sure of herself, and her tale. Roger appeared to listen.
He barked three times . . . then four times . . . then
more. I lost count. But Sally didn't, apparently. She
wiped her eyes on the sleeve of her nightgown, tossed
her head back and cried triumphantly —

"There, he says I had better warn you ! He can't be
quite sure — he's not so young as he was — his power of
endurance is weakened ! That's what he says, as well
as he can — to me who understand him. . . . Did you
notice," she continued, "how Dysart's dog limps?
Well, that's because — every one knows it, though it's
supposed to be a secret — the police examined him —
tormented, I call it — a year ago, in connection with a

case of arson. Dysart's ricks were set on fire " she

chuckled.

" Who was accused ? "

"Me."

"And did you "

"That's not the point. But Dysart's dog was got to



Digitized by



Google



2o8 TALES OF THE UNEASY

admit that he had seen one of my men loitering about
at an awkward time — the time when it happened, in
fact. The police couldn't make anything of his evidence
— it was too scanty, luckily ; but all the same, he's gone
lame ever since. I hate the police as I hate sin. . . .
Brutes they are ! . . . Roger, good dog, tell me how
did you learn the code in this short time ? "

Roger barked gently, a little chain of barks.

"From Dysart's dog, he says. It's quite simple.
Well, George, look here — no, I'm not cold when I'm
interested-— I'll go on getting it from Roger, and perhaps
I'll be able to convince you that for his own sake, Roger
had better be put out of the way. He wishes it. . . ."

"I am convinced," I said. I was convinced that she
was off her head on this particular point, and that a
good rest would set her right. I put my arm round her,
and tried to kiss her and lead her away. But she pushed
me off.

"Go and sit over there. Don't worry me. I want all
my wits about me now, and once you see the danger —
if you love me you won't set the life of an old toothless,
worn-out dog against mine, for that's what it comes
to.

" I do love you, Sally. . . . Now, Roger, stand and
deliver. Answer the lady."

There is no good fighting hallucinations, it is best to
humour them. Any doctor would have agreed with me
that it was useless to argue with a woman so terribly
excited as Sally was. There she stood, barefooted on
the stone floor, in the light circle that the candle made,
waving her arms and casting shadows of awful length
and shape. The black jagged ends of the rafters of the
broken flooring over her head framed her in spikes, as
they sagged and drooped towards the middle of the room



Digitized by



Google



THE WITNESS 209

where she was. Nice home-coming for a man after all
those years f . . . I wished, then — how I wished ! — I
had stayed in Wyoming with my faithful Roger, and
only seen Sally as I remembered her, plucky, resolute
and sensible, instead of the all-to-pieces madwoman
remorse had made of her.

But she was determined to go through with the mad
farce. She stooped, tossed back her hair and fixed
Roger with her eyes. He met them as dogs do without
flinching or turning away. Poor dear old Roger was so
faithful and so old, I did wish she would leave him
alone. But no —

"Roger," she said solemnly, "did Dysart's dog warn
you of the state of things here, and of what might happen
to you ? "

A lot of little orderly barks answered her. Though
Roger always did bark when you spoke to him in a
certain domineering tone, it was fairly horrible.

Sally turned to me, and her voice was lifted with pride.

"He says yes, that he is fully informed. Moreover,
Dysart's dog has told him that his master has had sus-
picions of you ever since a certain tramp woman he met
on the Witton-Gilbert road was so keen on finding her
way to you. William Dysart told her she would prob-
ably find you in bed with me, blast and curse him ! I
am glad I burnt five of his ricks ! "

"Come, come, Sally, does my dog really say all
that?" I mocked her.

"He says that and a lot more. That Dysart went
straight to the police this morning after seeing you and
your dog walk across the market-place — now, then ! "

"Damn it all, that's where Roger picked up the cur
first," I called out, for I own this struck me. And the
dog's manner was disquieting. All this was exciting
p



Digitized by



Google



2io. TALES OF THE UNEASY

and very bad for him. He shivered and whined very
low.

" Roger, Roger, old man 1 " I caressed him and talked
to him as if he was human and sensible, as indeed he
was, but only as dogs — the best of them — are. "Don't
take on so f What is it ? What's the matter ? "

"He'll tell you fast enough," Sally said, grinning.
She went up to him, too, and passed her hands over his
back. "Come, tell us all about it, good dog."

I couldn't bear to see her lay her Judas hand on him.

I shouted, "Don't you touch my dog, you " I

couldn't find a word bad enough for her — not even one
of the worst; all my love for her had gone, melted away.

"All right! " she answered carelessly, desisting.

So we both stood at an equal distance from Roger,
who barked incessantly for about five minutes. I thought
I noticed gaps between the groups of barks, as it were,
but even now I cannot be quite sure. Sally had got me
into the same state as the dog, we were both beside
ourselves — fairly bewitched, I think.

Now Sally translated, in a level voice. Her quiet was
more awful than her bluster.

" He says, ' Master, save me from the torture. I am
old, I have not many months to live. Shoot me first. I
may not be able to stop myself from betraying you— and
her. Shoot me, in mercy ! Shoot me ! ' "

" Is that so, Roger ? " I asked him. The spell wrought
on me so that I began to believe it. " Do you want me
to kill you ? "

He barked— yes, he barked horribly.

Then I turned on Sally, and she held up her head and
looked me with insolence in the face, and the dog began
to plunge and strain on the cord, barking furiously all
the time.



Digitized by



Google



THE WITNESS 211

"You devil," I yelled, "you are taking me in f This
is all a plan got up to make me put away my faithful
old dog ! "

" Look at your dog ! " she said, calmly. " He has more
sense than you. Do you know what he is trying to do?
He's trying to commit suicide — he says it's his only
chance, if you won't shoot him. You coward 1 Afraid
to put him out of his misery and help him to get out of
the way before he's forced to betray you ! Go and get
your gun ! Kill him, man — or let me."

I came out of my maze just in time. I saw Sally
whip the knife out from under her and go for Roger
with it. The dog had nearly succeeded in strangling
himself — he had come to make gurgling noises in his
throat. . . . But I was all there, now. ...

"Don't you do it, old dog ! " I up and shouted. "I'll
settle her, as she settled Mary ! "

• ••••••

And that is why I am sitting here in Durham gaol
waiting to be hanged, and a good riddance too. I don't
care to live. . . . Poor Roger did manage to commit
suicide. He knew.



p 2



Digitized by



Google



Digitized by



Google



THE BAROMETER



Digitized by



Google



Digitized by



Google



THE BAROMETER

There existed a few years ago, in the Yorkshire wolds,
a state of affairs in which the barometer was more con-
sulted than the Bible, and the only barometer in the
district hung in the hall of the Vicarage and belonged
to the parson, who scanned it daily and out of its
abstruse lettering gave no hope to his pining household.
The relentless needle stood ever at "set fair," and the
terrible drought, which had already lasted for six whole
weeks, continued. The dreary sheet of sky overhead
stretched in its pitiless blueness over the baked brown
earth that lay beneath, parched and cracked and yawn-
ing for rain. In between the rift set apart for their
habitation, walked sad human beings, sighing and com-
plaining, full of vague physical uneasiness and sense of
stress of longing.

The Church and Vicarage of Barmoor, and the few
cottages to which it ministered, made the only break in
the wilderness of moorland that stretched away for miles
to Pickering on the one side and Danby Moor on the
other. Three trees grew near the Vicarage : the boughs
of one hung over the roof of the lean-to, and made a
land-mark over the moor. In the early spring they had
been fine bunches of verdure. Now their tattered and
disconsolate foliage hung motionless, shrinking day by
day into the brown semblance of what were once green
leaves, A little beck ran at the bottom of the parson f 9

215



Digitized by



Google



2i6 TALES OF THE UNEASY

garden, but it was now all but dry. Everything was
dried and wasted, except the heather which sprouted and
thickened and browned under the desolating shine of the
pitiless sun, while the air above it quivered with
refraction.

"The air is dancing ! " cried the parson's boys, lying*
in the thick tufts and looking towards the low ridges
that bounded their moor to the north. Later on it grew
so hot that the very sun was veiled in mist, and the air
did not dance any more, but stood still with weariness,
so the children said, again. A lighted candle, held in
the kitchen garden, flared straight up, like a pillar.

The children tried it — they tried everything — every-
thing permissible under the strict system of Vicarage
discipline — to amuse themselves, in these days, when"
their elders were too tired and cross to undertake to keep
them happy. They wandered about together, their arms
heavily linked round each other's shoulders, dragging
their feet along the cinder paths in an irritating unison.
They stood now, in their baggy little home-made clothes,
on the path that led down the kitchen garden, bordered
with feeble flowers. It was only bordered; the middle
patch of ground was, perforce, devoted to usefuPvege-
table cultivation. The living of Barmoor was not a rich
living, and the Rev. Matthew Cooper, its incumbent,
stood very low in position, birth, and education.

His gardener, who was also the sexton, was digging
the potatoes for early dinner. He grunted while he dug,
and his back was turned to the children, who watched,
with a kind of fascination born of ennui, the turn of
the fork and the roll of the loose mould, and the horny
hand that came down every now and then and gathered
up the harvest of his toil and flung it into a basket.
Saunders was careless, and let several potatoes roll back



Digitized by



Google



THE BAROMETER 217

into the furrow, out of the eight or so that each turn of
the fork should yield.

"Oh, Saunders, look, ye've missed one!" piped the
youngest child.

"Happen I have, Master John," replied the old man.
" It's ower hot to be fashed ! "

The child sighed.

"Won't it really rain soon, Saunders dear ? " he asked
wearily. He had heard so much lately of this wonderful
rain that was to heal all ills and make the world a
pleasant place again. Child-like, he had forgotten what
rain was like, and how he hated it, since it kept him
indoors, and spoiled his play.

"Happen it may, happen it mayn't ! " muttered the old
^servant sulkily. With a sudden access of spite, he
* added, "Didn't the master pray for it i' church last
Sunda' ? But some folks has no influence with the
Almighty. A'm sayin' that the Lord ought to do it for
His ain sake — the bonny garden's fair perished for the
want of a little kindly moisture."

" I think it will rain soon ! " said the youngest child
again gravely. In his blue eyes was something of the
rapt look of a visionary.

"Well, it doesna' look much like it," grumbled the
old fellow, pointing up with his fork to the sky that
hung above, a wall of greyness, and coming very close
to earth, somehow. "What for suld it rain, think'st
tha' ? "

" Because it must in .the end," replied the child
sturdily. "It wants to rain so badly. It is like me,
when I want to cry and can't. Oh, Saunders, there's
another potato you've left. What a lot you miss ! "

"Gan awa'! .Gan awa'," said Saunders impatiently,
"and let me get done. Gan awa' an tew Hannah ! "



Digitized by



Google



218 TALES OF THE UNEASY

He shook his pitchfork at them with playful savagery,
and they turned away.

"Listen, Willie," said the child called John, confi-
dentially taking his brother's arm, and leading him
towards the kitchen, a low, one-storied outhouse attached
to the house, overshadowed by the biggest of the elm
trees. "Listen, Willie; I think the sky is like a great
wall, very thick, and yet very brittle. There's all sorts
of queer things going on the other side of it, that we
can't see."

"Tell us," said the elder boy, dimly interested.

"There's great bulls roaring, and sparks flying, like
in Hobbie Noble's forge, and a noise — such a noise !
If there comes a hole in the wall ; we shall see it." His
eyes dilated; he squeezed his less poetical minded
brother's hand.

"Hout ! " said the listener, "I don't care for that story
much. Let us go in, and bide with Hannah a bit."

The Vicarage rooms were damp and insufficiently
lighted, but the Vicarage kitchen was bright and
pleasant. Hannah's lime and marl floor was freshly
washed, her copper vessels as bright as the mirror in
Mrs. Cooper's best bedroom ; but in spite of all these
signs of previous activity the girl herself was sitting in
a limp and weary attitude, her knees apart, and a great
bowl of peas between them, which she was "podding"
for dinner. Her eyes were heavy ; her big lump of flaxen
hair hung on one side of her head ; her clumsy red hands
moved among the pods lazily and inattentively. "Deary
me — a deary me ! " she murmured to herself at short
intervals.

"Now, bairns ! " She roused herself as the two slunk
in. "I've not time for none of you. Gan awa' and
play, there's good childer ! "



Digitized by



Google



THE BAROMETER 219

"Don't be cross, Hannah!" said the eldest timidly.
"We've only corned in for a sup of milk."

"The milk is all gone sour," she replied shortly.' "Ye
mun just content yersel's wi' a drink of water from the
pump. Now be off with you ! "

She gave the thin, inoffensive house-cat a hoist with
her foot, and settled down to her peas again.

The pump in the garden had gone dry long since and
Hannah knew it. The water they used in the house-
hold — that all the village used — came from one place,
the well at the bottom of the village, which had luckily
continued its functions in spite of the drought.

The children, as Hannah knew well enough, did not
really want anything to drink, they wanted nothing but
the antidote of human conversation to the restlessness
and uneasiness that they shared with Hannah and
Saunders, and what their father was apt to call "the
lower animals." The house-dog was as restless as they,
and would neither play with them nor stay quiet in his
kennel. The hens fluttered brusquely in the hen-house,
and the feverish rushing of wings that went on there
made it an unpleasant abiding-place for the children.
They sometimes amused themselves by going in to hunt
for eggs, but they left them alone to-day, and wandered
on to the open study window, where the Reverend
Matthew Cooper, in hot, black clothes, was working at
his sermon for next Sunday, putting his hand up to
his head every now and again.

The two little boys were always somewhat in awe of
their stern father, and all they dared do now was to
stand and watch him, until the intermittent scraping of
their feet on the walk in front of the window roused him
from his meditations. He looked up; his brow was
pained.



Digitized by



Google



220 TALES OF THE UNEASY

" Well, my laddies, what do you want ? " He spoke
kindly enough, but his voice dragged with fatigue and
oppression.

"Father," asked the eldest child, "Father, tell us;
why don't they send rain when you pray for it?"

"You had better go and ask your mother," said the
Vicar, with the sort of grim humour in which he usually
dealt. He was by nature a hard, cold, God-fearing,
painstaking, undeveloped man, conscious of having a
wife who managed him. "What about your lessons?
Willie, I gave you a chapter to write out. Go and do
some work if you can't play."

"But we've got a headache, Father."

"So have I — splitting. Run away now, and let me
go on with my sermon. I haven't even chosen my text
yet. . . . ' Who doeth great things and unsearchable.
. . . Behold, He withholdeth the waters and they dry
up. . . . He bindeth the waters in His thick clouds,
and the cloud is not rent under them. . . . He destroyeth
the perfect and the wicked. . . . If the scourge slay
suddenly, He will laugh at the trial of the innocent! ' "

The children left him, in desperation, and, going down
to the bottom of the garden, took off their socks and
sat with their feet in the diminished brook. The dog
would not come with them, but snapped and growled
at John when he tried to make overtures to it. Hannah,
who came to look for them to fetch them to early dinner,
could not find them, though they were only under the
shade of the big rowan-bush near the brook-head. But
she did not trouble herself to look very far, she herself
could not have told you what ailed her.

" I cannot find them, mistress," she said to their mother
sitting, carving-knife in one hand and fork in the other,
before the family joint, which Hannah had set before
her, previous to going in search of the truants.



Digitized by



Google



THE BAROMETER 221

"Oh, very well ! if they don't choose to come in to
their meals ! "

Mrs. Cooper helped her husband to a plateful, and sent
it in to him to his study, which he had intimated he was
too busy to leave. She ate a small portion herself —
not much — it was too hot to be hungry. She was a
hard woman, and the absence of her two little sons did
not affect her appetite in the least.

The kind-hearted maid gave them what she called "a
bite and a sup " later on, when they came and put their
apprehensive heads round the door cheek. She did not
scold them. The youngest boy looked very pale and
white, and avoided her eyes.

"Poor bairn ! " she said, "he wants setting up with
the sea air."

The two children lay down after they had eaten, and
slept on a heap of sacking, very clean and dry, near
the woodstack. Their little bedroom was over the
kitchen, and easy of access, but very dreary in the day-
time because of the huge tree that overshadowed it.
Hannah did not think of sending them up there, but
flung a sack over their bare legs as they lay, and did
not disturb them.

As the afternoon wore on to evening the hush became
oppressive. Not a breath, not a sound of birds twitter-
ing, of fowls fluttering. Only the far-away moo of a
discontented cow in an outhouse somewhere in the hills
sounded like a faint trumpet call, and emphasized the
stillness. The sky seemed nearer than ever now, and
oppressively near, and all-encompassing.

As Hannah crossed the yard, just before supper, to
throw a pail of scrapings into the pig-trough, she heard
a noise. It was not Hodgson's cow. ... It might have
been the grinding of one of Miller Farsyde's flour
wagons on the quartz that sprinkled the road up there



Digitized by



Google



222 TALES OF THE UNEASY

beyond the brow — half-a-mile away. She did not know
what it was — a very faint rumble. She thought no more
of it, but as she crossed the courtyard on her way back
something dropped on to the back of her hand which
she could have sworn was a rain-drop. . . . !

The thought passed. Her country mind again was
a blank. She gave the boys a shake as she passed in.
"Come now, wake up ! 'Tis supper time ! "

The youngest boy stirred and frowned.

" Is it come ? " he said— "the hole in the wall ? "

"Whatten hole? Whatten wall? Whatten rubbish
is the child talking about ? " she said carelessly, brush-
ing the loose straws off his jacket with strong sideway
pats, and leading him in to the dining-room where
supper was spread. Willie, the elder and more prosaic
of the two, manifested some interest in the items of the
meal. It was beans and bacon and porridge, too solid
fare for such a day as this had been. The Vicar had
finished his sermon, and was sitting in his place, as
pale as his white tie, but otherwise placable enough.
The eldest child went round to his own high chair in
silence, but the youngest crossed the room to his
mother's side and pulled her by the sleeve.

" What ails ye, laddie ? " she asked not unkindly.

" Will you give me a kiss, Mammy ? " he asked shame-
facedly and in a low voice, lest his brother should hear,
and taunt him for being a "mammy pet."

"What nonsense!" Mrs. Cooper said, with all the
helpless shyness of a hard woman. She stooped down
and kissed her little appealing son, nevertheless. "Now,
sit down, and eat your supper quietly. Well, Mr.
Cooper, how have ye got on with your sermon ? "

" Badly ! " replied her husband. " I seem tp have such
a weight on my brain — an oppression ! It is quite



Digitized by



Google



THE BAROMETER 223

dreadful. It is so bad, it really can't last — something
must happen. Eat your supper, John, and don't stare."

For the youngest child's eyes were constantly fixed
on his father, and little questions seemed to be trembling
on his lips. He said nothing until supper was over,
when he begged his mother to read to them, in which
request he was seconded by his elder brother.

She got the big family Bible and reverently flirted the
pages. . . .

"Read about the Israelites and the Plagues of Egypt,"
suggested Willie.

"Very well," the mother said equably. Her day's
work was done, she had time now, and was willing to
please the children in their own way.

" ' And Moses stretched forth his rod towards the
heaven, and the Lord sent thunder and hail ' "

"I wish He would," murmured the Vicar.

" * And the fire ran along the ground, and the Lord
rained hail upon the land of Egypt. . . .' "

She was going on in her monotonous, uneducated
voice, when the youngest child suddenly screamed and
hid his face in the cushions of the sofa.

"Whisht, whisht! " she called out, by way of sooth-
ing him. "Why, you silly body, haven't ye heard it
all before?"

The child continued to sob.

His face remained hidden. Sternly his parent ignored
his hysterical outburst.

" How old were the children of Israel ? " asked Willie,
by way of distracting the attention of his elders from
this bad conduct on his brother's part, which would
assuredly end in both being sent off to bed. Crying was
never allowed. "Were they as old as me, or only as
old as John ? "



Digitized by



Google



224 TALES OF THE UNEASY

Mrs. Cooper now gave her mind to the destruction
of this erroneous impression under which her children
had been labouring, and when it was done she raised her
voice, and called " Hannah ! " to the maid, who was to
be heard moving heavily about in the passage.

John raised his tear-stained face from the sofa, a
wild terror in his eyes. Willie clasped his hands to-
gether, and together they pleaded with an unaccountable
vehemence. . . .

"Oh, no, no, Mother; please, Mother — we don't want
to go to bed. We can't ! We can't ! " both wailed.

"And what for no?" asked the mother, raising her
strongly marked black eyebrows. "Why not to bed, to-
night, same as other nights ? "

" Because — because — oh, Mother ! because we want
another story. We want Abram and Isaac," pleaded
William. It was only an excuse, and the mother
knew it.

"One story is quite enough for one evening," she
answered severely; "and John did not behave particu-
larly well over that; I won't hear any fond nonsense.
Now you just trot along both of you ! You are both
as cross and sleepy as you can be. Bed's the safest
place for you ! "

Her rough soothing was of no value. The children's
faces, as Hannah came in, were blanched with terror.
John ran up to the kindly servant-maid, and hid his
face in the folds of her linsey gown.

"I want to speak to you," he sobbed.

"Noo, what then, ma honey?" said Hannah good-
humouredly, stooping, till her smooth head touched his
touzled one. "Well!" — as she raised her head — "did
ye ever hear the like? What sets ye asking that?
Mistress, he wants to know if they mayn't creep in
aside of father and mother to-night?"



Digitized by



Google



THE BAROMETER 225



"i



'Please let us, Mother," they murmured, almost
inaudibly.

"I never heard anything so fond! " exclaimed Mrs.
Cooper, laughing grimly. "Be off with ye both quietly,
now, and let me hear no more nonsense."

"We did once, Mother!"

" Once I Yes ! when they were mending the roof of
your bedroom ; but the roof's safe and sound over your
heads now, at any rate. Why," she laughed, "why,
when I give ye a nice big bed to yourselves, should I
go and cram my own and the master's with two tire-
some children, to kick me black and blue before morn-
ing ? What are ye afeared of, I say ? "

But they would own to nothing, and averted their
eyes. A little underswell of sobbing, whimpering
breaths testified to their distress.

"What's come to the bairns, I wonder?" She was
puzzled, through her thick mental hide of unsympathy.
"They're as fractious I It's this unked weather sets us
all out of our wits."

"It must break," said her husband, "there's no sense
in it. We may have rain to-morrow. I forgot to look
at the glass as I passed in to-night. There may be a
change soon, nay, there must be. . . . Come here,
children, and say your prayers, and let's have no more
crying."

They all at once realized the hopelessness of it all,
and came meekly to his knee, Hannah folded her hands
and looked on approvingly at the two flaxen heads, as
in their innocent, pretty, piping voices they begged
blessings on their hardened elders, and murmured deep
contrition for the sins they had not yet committed. They
wound up as usual with the prayer —

" ' Lighten our darkness, we beseech Thee, O Lord,
and by Thy great mercy defend us from all perils and
Q



Digitized by



Google



226 TALES OF THE UNEASY

dangers of this night; for the love of Thine only Son,
our Saviour Jesus Christ. Amen. 9 "

Sadly they rose and kissed their parents, who had
so carelessly crossed them in their strong instinctive
desire, and murmured inaudible good-nights. Then
Hannah, taking a little submissive hand of each, led
them out of the room.

They went past the weather-glass in the hall, whose
strongly marked signs and signals of change they were
too young, and Hannah too ignorant, to understand, and
walked round by half roofless passages to the kitchen.
Then Hannah, laughingly propelling "mischief in front
of her," inducted them up the shaky wooden staircase
that led into the large room where they always slept,
brooded over by the enormous over-arching elm-tree.
Its branches tapped the little skylight pane when it was
windy, but now they hung still like a drooping banner
in a calm.

"I do believe it's that ugly, girt tree they're feared
of ! " Hannah thought to herself.

During the passage towards their sleeping place they
said nothing, but the fingers of the younger child closed
and unclosed round the maid's stout thumb, and the
touch struck her as very cold.

"I'd let you both creep in aside o' me," she said,
"only I'm that fleyed o' the mistress! She'd find us
out, as sure as my name is Hannah Cawthorne."

She set down the candle on the chest in the long, low,
empty loft-room. The chest and the bed were almost
the only articles of furniture in it. The wooden rafters
that supported the roof made fanciful bars and arches
over the white dimity quilt. The bed was large, clean
and comfortless.

When the two children had undressed and lain down,



Digitized by



Google



THE BAROMETER 227

Hannah Cawthorne, of a gloomy North Country turn
of mind that ran continually on omens and predestina-
tions, could not help thinking how like two corpses laid
out they looked, lying so straight, their little bodies out-
lined under the quilt, their eyes wide open and staring
at the roof. It made her uncomfortable.

"There's nought to be af eared on," she thought, try-
ing to bring comfort to herself merely, for the children
were still, submissive and past all repining now. "It's
as safe as a church, but all the same. . . . Now shut
your eyes," she said aloud, "there's good lads, and say
4 Gentle Jesus ' till ye feel the sleep coming on ye.
Oh, ye'll sleep fine, trust me. Shall I leave ye the
light?"

This was a wild stretch of authority. She might have
lost her place over it. She was relieved when they shook
their heads and declined it.

"See here," she went on, producing an apple from
her pocket. "See here, ye can munch this atween ye."

She laid it down on the coverlet, but no little hand
came forth to take it.

" Poor bairns, they're sad-like. . . . Eh, she's a hard
woman, is the mistress ! If they were mine, shouldn't
I like them to nestle in aside o'me! This room is fair
lonesome. Naebody could hear them if they were to
skrike out. ..."

" What are ye looking at, my honey ? " she asked John
curiously, for the child's eyes remained obstinately fixed
on the roof, as if he saw something there.

"He's looking at the hole in the wall," volunteered
the eldest boy at last. "He's shiverin'."

"Hap him up in your arms, ma bonny bairn, that'll
soon warm him. . . . Now I must be going, lads. . . .
Good-night to ye both. . . ."

Q2



Digitized by



Google



228 TALES OF THE UNEASY

Hesitating, reluctant, she took up her candle and made
a start for the door.

"I don't half like leaving them," she murmured, as
she stole out casting a last look at the two children,
lying clasped, according to her recommendation, in each
other's arms. Their faces were hidden in each other's
necks, their sad apprehensive eyes were closed, obedi-
ently summoning sleep.

Gently snecking the door, she blundered down the
rickety staircase, and made her way back into the other,
safer part of the house. Ignorant, she passed by the
mysterious oracle hanging in the hall, unable to read or
understand the plain meaning which its hands now
bore.

"Eh, but she's a right hard woman, is the mistress,
and master follows her in all things. He'd have let the
poor childer come in aside him, when they begged and
prayed fit to turn a heart of stone. . . ."

She did not toss on her hard pallet, but lay stupefied
in the heavy slumber that was the meed of her arduous
existence. Upstairs, in the best bedroom, the Reverend
Matthew Cooper slept off his headache. His wife did
not drowse, but lay by her husband's side, straight and
still as she had laid down, congratulating herself on the
great healing storm that was even now breaking over
the Vicarage, gloating over its promise of recomfiture
and peace. ... It thundered and lightened for two
hours.

When morning dawned the great drought was over,
and the air was refreshed.

Hannah, the maid, rose and went about her duties with
a light heart, and presently, having started the kitchen
fire, called the parson and his wife to resume theirs.

When it was time, she pulled her dirty kitchen apron



Digitized by



Google



THE BAROMETER 229

aside, put the kettle where it could not for the moment
boil over, and went to call the parson's children.

She went up the crooked stair and opened the door
gently, "not to waken them sudden." The first thing
she saw, before she screamed, was the wide, jagged hole
on the rafters above the bed where they still lay in each
other's arms. The lightning that, guided by the tree
which hung over the roof, had passed through to the
innocent children and dealt them their unearned and
undeserved death, had not divided them. They were
quiet and unchanged in appearance except for some little
blue marks like shot in the forehead of the one and the
breast of the other.



Digitized by



Google



Digitized by



Google



THE TIGER-SKIN



Digitized by



Google



Digitized by



Google



THE TIGER-SKIN

I
Wi Tis but a little piece of Childhood thrown away?*— JOHN Ford.

She wandered about the wards at the Infants' Hos-
pital, a privileged person, ignored, tolerated, looked on
askance by the properly caparisoned, properly certifi-
cated, properly trained nurses. She was not a nurse,
she was not even a probationer, except by courtesy;
she was the daughter of the founder of the Hospital,
Dr. Emeric Favarger. She spent many hours there,
lounging about, asking irrelevant questions of the nurses
and the visiting doctors, getting into the way as only
a privileged person can do. She was no good, she could
not even amuse a baby, or keep it quiet for a moment
until expert assistance arrived. She was there, it was
understood, because she liked it ; because the grey-green
walls and absence of decoration were soothing to her,
and the rows of white cots, to the number of thirty,
each with its frontal brass denoting the name and style
of its god-parent and pecuniary backer that lined both
sides of the room. Her own name, Adelaide Favarger,
figured over one little bed, and she was used to take
up its puling occupant now and again. She would
linger, casting her liquid glances at its chance, con-
stantly varied, occupant lying there, with some at least
of the creases of ill-nurture and previous ill-usage
smoothed out and eased by the bands of merciful sleep.

She was twenty-five years of age, unmarried, mother-

233



Digitized by



Google



234 TALES OF THE UNEASY

less, the only daughter of Dr. Favarger. He was old,
and had grown excessively rich, and had found himself
able long since to retire from the activities of the pro-
fession. He still had his room in the Hospital, lectured
there twice a week, and saw foreign doctors, depart-
mental authorities, philanthropists and other persons
who were interested in this particular new departure.
This he had inaugurated himself, hoping to see it lead
to Eugenical cultivation of the uncounted progeny of
the struggling, uninstructed masses. At home, in the
immense wool-gathering house he rented in Portland
Place, he had a room the door of which was kept always
closed. Behind this he was understood to be engaged
in "experiments." He entered it, never from the house,
but by a door that gave on a mews at the back. As
people said, anything — all sorts of things — might be
going on in that house and never be heard of. It was
known that Dr. Favarger bred and kept there countless
cats ; he wrote and commented learnedly on their habits
in the monthlies. He was a man who might have been
asked out to dinner every night in the year if he had
chosen to let himself figure in the list of Society's
possible guests. But that he had always refused to do,
and his daughter shared his self-imposed solitude. She
was not the kind of girl whom hostesses asked out alone,
or at a moment's notice, to fill up a gap. She had no
cordiality, no entrain, no "go." She was attractive but
not charming, the image of her father, whose hooked
beaky nose she had inherited, together with passionate,
regretful eyes that her dead mother had left her.

But no restraint was put upon her exercise of hospi-
tality in Portland Place. She could ask any one she
liked to dinner and she availed herself constantly of the
privilege — but the proportion of male guests who put



Digitized by



Google



THE TIGER-SKIN 235

their knees under the old mahogany dining-table and
drank her father's old port, which was almost famous,
was far in excess of the female. But Adelaide did not
object to this proportion. Still, sly, silent with an air
of biding her time, at eighteen ; by the time she was
twenty-five, the passion in her eyes was tremendous;
she glowed in her dark setting, a meagre Circe who
gathered the ready-made beasts about her, and shook no
deterrent wand at them.

These were her evenings, smoke of cigars, fumes of
liqueurs, conversations of veiled indecency under the
guise of scientific discussion, which were led by her
father; the cynical, heartless old man, holding forth
indifferently, from sheer love of talking, to the audi-
ences of queer, inferior, second-rate men that his
daughter provided for him nightly. And for her days,
they were mostly spent within the four walls of the
abode of sanitation and physical purity that represented
the outcome of both their theories of life. Adelaide had
no sense of humour, but the cruel old man was apt to
say that his daughter was the only microbe in the
establishment — that miracle of asepticism. He gave her
plenty of pocket-money, gibed at her to her friends
before her face, but allowed her to do exactly as she
liked, and with no consideration for her extreme youth
and the life she had to live when he was gone, fared
contemptuously towards the grave of known finality
that awaited him. He had done his best for the world
in the establishment of a higher ideal of infant feeding
and early physical culture.

He had done well by his daughter, he had fulfilled his
duty as he considered it towards her mind and body.
He had given her the best of educations. She had been
to school by the sea as a child, as a girl to college. She



Digitized by



Google



236 TALES OF THE UNEASY

had insisted on being highly trained and educated up
to the nadir of her powers, and had her views cut and
dried at sixteen. Carefully concentrating herself, with
feverish intentness on efficiency, she had managed to
do well in the tripos at Oxford, but her friends said that
she had been screwed up to the required pitch by her
imperious vanity. The girls of her year who had come
out below her in Honours used to laugh when they met
her afterwards in the street ; for them she was the crank
who had outstripped them, peering as her habit was,
under the hoods of perambulators, on her way to lectures
on Eugenics and Baby-Culture. They had heard all
about her desire, nay, her fixed determination, to marry
and worthily contribute to the World-Force, in the usual
manner. At Somerville Hall, she had made no secret
of her intention to bear an Eugenical child, or two,
having first selected its father carefully, from a physio-
logical point of view. Oh, yes, she had talked of
nothing else at tea parties and walks, and had bored
them so that when she left she had made no harvest of
life-friends. They had tossed their learned young heads,
and quite expected, some day, to hear of Adelaide
Favarger, in spite of her big talk, as the feeble hang-
dog mother, if a mother at all, of one puny infant, be-
gotten of nerves and hysteria, by the usual self-selecting
father. That is, if any man chose her, and this, in spite
of her wealth, they were inclined to doubt.

She wasn't a girl who appealed to the men that marry.
They felt that, and they were right.

For men, looking at Adelaide Favarger with the in-
stinctive and unconscious cunning of the male, that
makes in the long run so surely for what Adelaide her-
self would have called the World Purpose, were likely
to pass her by, as sexually ineligible for motherhood.



Digitized by



Google



THE TIGER-SKIN 237

Socially, too, she did not appear apt to satisfy their own
particular standards of comfort and pleasure. Though,
indubitably, Adelaide would be rich, they feared to take
a wife out of the dreary, ill-managed, ill-cleaned house
in Portland Place, full of unprobed corners and flights
of stairs that seemed to drop you into plumbless depths
of scullerydom and basement. The hall and dining-
room were full of valuable mahogany furniture whose
dull unpolished surfaces reflected nothing, the drawing-
room was spread with rich yellow damask, that draped
the sofas and chairs, and hung as curtains to mask as
much scanty light as was willing to filter in through the
tall windows that no normal housemaid could reach up
to clean. No one did clean them. The curtains soared
out of sight into the dusty ceilings and the chance hand,
essaying to draw them further apart, shook out a dusty
flavour that nipped the nostrils and was forthwith obliged
to desist.

Adelaide's dinners, and she gave a great many of
them, were ill cooked, scrambling and depressing. But
the wine, Dr. Favarger's own province, was excellent.
He himself would have none of it. As soon as the
sweets were put on, it was the old Doctor's custom to
rise, to stuff his creased napkin into the middle of his
plate, and to leave the room without comment. It was
always the same. He did not as a rule appear again :
he disliked the kind of man that his daughter was apt
to invite, and he had no desire to control her in the
matter* The men were rather sorry to see him go, he
was lazy, cynical and fascinating.

There was one of Adelaide's men whom he perhaps
did not dislike. Yet, although he would not sit out the
dinner even for him, the only time that Wald Ensor
dined with Adelaide he stayed until the coffee and



Digitized by



Google



238 TALES OF THE UNEASY

cigarettes were put on. Perhaps it was because he had
himself introduced his daughter to the amiable young
man at the Children's Hospital. Ensor came to inquire
after a child, whom he had kindly been instrumental
in bringing in. It was dying of malnutrition. Its slum
mother, stupid, underfed and wretched, but not vile,
could not nourish it properly even if she would.

The image of the tall, handsome young fellow with the
perishing child in his arms had never left Adelaide ; she
had fallen in love with Wald Ensor, and with Adelaide,
to fall in love was to ask to dinner.

Ensor came. He was excessively fascinating to
Adelaide, because he was so different from her other
young men and especially from the second-rate Chelsea
artist whom she had asked to make a fourth, and whom
she already considered a survival from her old days of
bad taste. Ensor's manner was perfection. He was
shyish, grave, intent, and self-contained, talked prettily
to her father about his hospital and his cats and respect-
fully to herself about the subjects in which a young lady
should be interested. Adelaide was not interested, but
she instinctively forebore to disabuse him.

She was too young, too reckless, too much unversed
in strategy, to conceal the trend of her feelings and
directing, as she did, all her conversation and her eyes
towards Ensor, she seriously alienated the liking of her
late friend, ally and limner, Mr. Wallace Marks, R.I.B.

He bided his time, however, and as long as Dr.
Favarger presided over his own table, he listened in a
frankly bored manner which contrasted with Wald
Ensor's polite attention to talk which he only half-
approved, coming from the lips of this savage irrespon-
sible old savant, the indifferent natural guardian of a
young girl's delicate morals.

"There is something," the old hook-nosed man was



Digitized by



Google



THE TIGER-SKIN 239

saying, "something to be said for the woman who ill-
treats her children."

Adelaide protested conventionally. "Nothing!" she
said.

"My daughter," said her father spitefully, without
looking in her direction, "wishes to impress you with
the fact of her well-known love for babies. She does
not, however, really care for them a bit. She has never
considered these matters scientifically in her life,
although she's always hanging round the Hospital, and
hindering my young assistants. If she had a child,
she'd neglect it. Cruelty — masked by Philanthropy!
Look for it deep — it's there ! " His nose appeared cold,
sharp and ferreting. He did not smile. Ensor
shuddered.

Adelaide made a wry face and Ensor was sorry for
her, disproportionately so, for she did not really mind
being teased by her parent. The old man continued —

"On the lines I have been mentioning to you, Ensor,
even child-murder is excusable, obeying, as it may be
said to do, an almost forgotten animal instinct. A cat,
say, who by some circumstance or other has been dis-
turbed before parturition and rendered hysterical "

"Good Lord, a hysterical cat " ejaculated the

bounder.

Dr. Favarger took no notice of him, but continued
his sentence —

— "will tear or otherwise destroy the progeny that
she foresees herself unable to feed or attend to. So
do unhappy servant girls, faced, in their hour of trial,
with the problem of the disposal of illegitimate offspring,
reserve to themselves the right of destroying what their
instinct tells them they will be unable in the future to
protect and nourish "

"Oh, Father," protested Adelaide again and her tone



Digitized by



Google



2 4 o TALES OF THE UNEASY

was sincere. "Think of it! The tender young life,
the helpless weakling, bone of one's bone, flesh of one's
flesh. . . . Motherhood is so sacred — it should, I think,
be subsidized by the State. A capitation fee for every
child. Then the mother would have the wherewithal to
nourish herself properly and maternal feeling would do
the rest."

Dr. Favarger smiled, a smile without kindness in it.
It was his daughter's smile. She had that too, as well
as his nose.

"Even then, she or you would probably have none
of these fine feelings at the moment. She has suffered
physically ; she is irresponsible : mere brutal selfish
instinct dominates her. And if she desists, if she does
make an attempt to salve it, she has to watch the hapless
infant" — he sneered — "through her care, surviving, but
as a hopeless idiot. ... Of course," he continued, "I
except cases of mere cruelty, such as baby-farming. If
a woman kills or ill-treats the child of another, no natural
feeling except greed of gain can possibly come into play,
not even vanity "

" Vanity ? " said Adelaide.

"Yes, Mother's vanity, a huge non-negligible factor
in these matters. But in most cases it is not necessary
to plead it, for nature's broad back may easily take the
blame. And when a woman of our own class, maybe, is
brought before the magistrate and fined or imprisoned
because she has taken a rod to the ugly duckling, or
systematically ill-treated a weakly, ungracious child to
the point of extinction, she might plead that she is only
doing what a cat or any other perfectly normal animal
does when one of her young is not up to sample, and
seems obviously degenerate to her keener sense. My
cat Philippa, for instance "



Digitized by



Google



THE TIGER-SKIN 241

» Adelaide sneered. The bounder fidgeted. Ensor
preserved his attitude of somewhat strained attention.

— " Had a fine litter of four the other day. I found one
of them, to my uninstructed eye, as healthy as the others,
on the cold stone floor for three successive mornings
before it died. She had thrown it out of the nest, she
had refused to feed it, she had just weeded it out. Why ?
It was unfit to live. And if you study these trials that
come up every now and then, and observe carefully the
characteristics of the little victims as described by the
officers of the S.P.C.C., you will see that in most cases
these brutalized children are slow, unprepossessing,
unpleasant and sometimes revolting in their habits.
They work up through the first few years of infancy,
unpetted, neglected, marked down to develop all the
successive stages of degeneracy. They are obviously
better dead. No pretty, healthy, fetching child — a child
like the egregious infant in Bubbles, say, — ever appears
in court on such a plea. There Mother's vanity comes
in. . . ."

He would have continued, but Adelaide, whom this
conversation neither pleased nor interested, rose. The
bounder heaved an audible sigh of relief. Ensor, though
he had been interested, even a little charmed by the
old man's manner, could not help deploring that this
extremely technical and advanced conversation had not
postdated the young girl's departure.

Old Dr. Favarger left the room with Adelaide. He
said to her in the hall, before he hobbled away to his
own study and sleeping apartment on the ground floor —

"You have picked up a gentleman for once."

She walked on as if he had not spoken. She always
made a point of not answering her father when he girded
at her. His approval of Ensor, though not unpleasing,



Digitized by



Google



242 TALES OF THE UNEASY

was absolutely immaterial to her. She loved him, she
meant to have him, through the door of marriage or no.
She went upstairs to the drawing-room to await the two
men, and flung herself down on the great yellow sofa
with the black cushions, too nervous even to smoke.
She was convinced, albeit for the twentieth time, that
she had found the Eugenical father at last.

• ••••••

Wald Ensor, the gentleman according to Dr. Favar-
ger's acceptance, left sitting after an atrocious dinner,
with a man who could not possibly fulfil the Doctor's
conditions, felt extremely uncomfortable. His annoy-
ance grew as his messmate tended to grow familiar in
conversation. A wretched artist from Chelsea, self-
styled modern, with white hair and a dyed moustache,
to whom the host had not vouchsafed a word all dinner !
The fine old man had been annoyed by his cockney
accent, presumably. He had talked, although she did
not listen, psychology with Adelaide, and his pert
underbred voice had broken in all the while through
Dr. Favarger's cultivated tones. Now that the host and
hostess were gone, this bounder ventured to turn the
analytical method on to his hostess herself, and Ensor
did not know how to stop him. He fidgeted about on
his Spanish leather covered chair, and made various
efforts to do so, but in vain.

"Nice girl, very," the creature went on. "With a face
like an old master — one of those Primitives, don't you
know ? Lots of drawing ^bout. Pity she's so morbid."

Wald Ensor made a gesture of negation.

"Oh, yes, she is. Talks of nothing but Eugenics and
so on. Thinks of nothing but the other thing. . . .
It's only a mask, with these women you know, all that
rot about child-bearing and being subsidized by the



Digitized by



Google



THE TIGER-SKIN 243

State and so on. She's an erotomaniac, that's what she
is — sits about on yellow sofas and asks men to love her.
They do that fast enough, she's very good fun — but
they don't marry her. ... Do you know Gertrude?
Do you know why they put up with her — she's the cook
— why the dinners here are so confoundedly bad ? " —

"No, I don't, and " Ensor expostulated. His

blood boiled, he didn't think he could stand it any
longer, he wanted to throw his glass in the fellow's
face. He rose. ...

The other man, nothing abashed, although their con-
versation had hardly lasted the canonical few minutes,
rose too, saying amiably, "So 1 Let's join our hostess."

He continued amiably as they passed out —

"Cook's bad, but can't be parted with, don't you
know? She's up to games of her own, is the fair
Gertrude. They found a baby she'd just had in a
dressing-table drawer, so Adelaide told me while she
was sitting. Time for confidences, eh ? Seen my por-
trait of her ? In the New "

They were half-way upstairs by this time. The artist
opened the drawing-room door and disclosed Adelaide
sitting, as he had predicted, on a yellow satin sofa, with
her head resting on black satin cushions. There was
room for one man beside her. The bounder slipped
easily and voluptuously into that place, and Ensor with
a spasm of jealous disgust, took an early opportunity
of making his adieux, and left them.

He never dined in the house again. He could not
bring himself to risk meeting men of that stamp.

Yet he pitied her. He admired her. Her great dis-
contented eyes haunted him. He felt as if a white
plaining woman's hand was outstretched to him from
r 2



Digitized by



Google



244 TALES OF THE UNEASY

out of a weltering sea of bounderism. Adelaide, a lady,
could not really like that sort of man ? No, for she liked
him. She wrote continually begging him to accept her
hospitality — hospitality of all kinds. She began to vary
skilfully the form of her invitations, but he still refused
all invitations to meals at her house.

At last she suggested that if he could not stand her
cook he should take her out to dine at "some low pot
house," so she phrased it. He laughed. For he knew
that if he should succumb to her blandishments, he
would certainly take her to a decent fairly respectable
restaurant : he would not pander to her taste for
Bohemianism, but save her from herself and her friends.

As he thought it over after each fresh invitation, a
taste for this form of social humanitarianism grew on
him. He began to fancy the idea of rescuing this really
nice girl and taking her to decent places and showing
her how a decent man would behave. The girl was
motherless, her father did not pretend to look after her.
She had a fine generous character, was large in her
ideas, she gave freely, she was kind to her own sex, and
would never go back on any one. The disreputable
cook, now, — he was sure that in keeping her on, poor
Miss Favarger was really undertaking a work of charity.
The woman had obviously had what is called a mis-
fortune, she had possibly gone through what is also
called a tragedy. Adelaide was obviously not the sort
of person who would ever cast a human being out of
doors, under any circumstances whatever, especially a
woman in the condition in which the cook had presum-
ably found herself. Lazy, preoccupied, indifferent, she
made no excuse for her shameful tolerance, and even
condescended to discuss the details of it with such worms
as Ensor's fellow guest of a few weeks ago. That was



Digitized by



Google



THE TIGER-SKIN 245

merely an error of taste, the result of her unmothered,
unchaperoned state. She was at bottom a really well-
bred woman. Ensor, a rover, a man who had knocked
about the world and yet preserved his vast shyness and
a modicum of innocence, thought he saw clearly that the
time and place were out of joint with Adelaide. Her
morals were mediaeval, with no present parallel except
perhaps one that should be found in the milieu of the
South Sea Islands.

So he came to invite her to dine with him at Prince's
and even Kettner's ; she had tea with him on the slopes
in Kensington Gardens ; they walked together in Hyde
Park on Sundays, Adelaide protesting vehemently that
she hated dressing up and posing as one of the smart
set. In vain Ensor assured her that to mingle casually
with that select denomination at Church Parade, was
not to be within a hundred miles of being "of " it : that
to dine at Kettner's with a man alone was sufficiently
unconventional. Adelaide continued to protest, to beg
him to take her to his flat, and to discuss sex questions
in a loud voice over restaurant dinner tables. She called
it Eugenics.

Ensor did not really enjoy these discussions, the
young woman, sitting there, her elbows on the table,
her hands propping her hard chin, her burning eyes
fixed on him made it almost impossible for him to eat
a solid British dinner, and keep his British countenance
at the same time.

He could stand any amount of talk of this kind from
platforms, or on the stage with the footlights between
him and the exponents of the new Feeling, the New
World Movement, the new Morality; here, under the
shaded red lights, with discreet foreign waiters gliding
about the chance commensals; the face to face discus-



Digitized by



Google



246 TALES OF THE UNEASY

sion of such topics outraged his simple sensitiveness
and ordinary sense of decency. The only thing that at
all saved the situation was the girl's astonishing absence
of self-consciousness. She talked like a boy — a clever,
morbid, self-conscious lad just home from college, her
sedulous use of slang helped the impression. Yet all
the while her eyes belied her and occasionally her voice.
Now and then an outrageous note of sex bitterness
pierced through her level lazy accents and brought their
talk home with a rush from the plane of impersonality.
With Adelaide it was when her eyes ceased to look
passionate and eager but became sombre and heavy,
instead : it was when her sharp grating voice grew soft
and mellow and trailing that Ensor feared her most, and
such moments were growing more and more frequent as
their meetings went on. He stood to his guns, how-
ever, he was not one to throw even a graceless woman
over.

Had he not been the most retiring, most modest of
men he would have realized that Adelaide Favarger was
in love with him. He would have disliked — he would
have refused to realize it, for it would h|ive forced him
to formulate his own feeling for her, and that was a
queer mixture of sensual pity, and revolted fascination.
There were times when he thought he fully grasped what
she wanted of him and was glad of her assumption that
his refusal to dine with her in Portland Place represented
merely a protest against the inefficiency of her cook.
This theory, which at all times and all seasons she put
before him, and which she had freely proffered as an
explanation of his "snubbing" of her, was a conveni-
ence to him, since it effectually masked his reluctance
to be the father of her eugenical child.



Digitized by



Google



THE TIGER-SKIN 247

Like her other men friends, Ensor always saw Adelaide
Favarger home after their evenings together. Unlike
the others, however, he always left her punctiliously on
the doorstep, as soon as her front door answered to her
key and the cavernous gulf of the hall swallowed her
up. No Bianca Capello business for him ! She used to
tease him about this, she used the romantic illustration,
with a point of bitterness. She had now accepted the
situation and no longer even asked him to come in.
Her " Good-nights " were a miracle of sour brevity and
conciseness.

One night in July they had been to the Exhibition
together and had sat late listening to the band playing
"Tristan." The out-door performance represented a pale
vapid reflection of the original orchestral heat and pas-
sion merely, but out there in the murky shadow-thridden
radiance, in the dust-fumed air, it was effective. Adelaide
had talked less than usual. The summer nights that
year were long and clear. When rather late, they
returned to it, satiate of romance, great, wide Portland
Place seemed to sleep lonely under a Norwegian mid-
night. Nothing so cold even as a moonbeam shone on
its raddled stones and stern house fronts, except where
a tree in the garden next to Adelaide's house hung over
her steps on one side and lent it some mystery. There
was a big party higher up the street and some stationary
taxicabs stood waiting in the middle of the roadway,
black, vague, a file of indistinguishable shapes, whence
the figure of a man now and then disengaged himself,
did something to his vehicle and was absorbed into the
mass again. Adelaide had insisted on Ensor's dismiss-
ing their own cab at Oxford Circus, and together they
walked across the broad stone-paved expanse. The girl
held her exiguous skirts tightly round her thin, airily



Digitized by



Google



248 TALES OF THE UNEASY

poised legs. She knew they were fine, she knew she
had a beautiful figure.

She gained the broad flat step in front of her door
and turned a little sideways to the man who stood wait-
ing for her to effect her entry and bid her a hasty good-
bye as usual. He was a little bemused by "Tristan";
he was looking dreamily back across the street they had
just traversed, his head full of carefully conceived,
adroitly moving harmonies. . . .

"Come in and have a drink ? " Adelaide said carelessly,
but her voice was rough and throaty.

The demand appeared to startle him. He thought he
had cured her of £11 that. Her request was out of all
order and he did not reply at once. . . .

She faced him but did not meet his eyes. . . .

"Why won't you?" she asked peevishly. "Even if
you won't dine? What have I done? Why am I
doomed? Cursed. . . ."

"My dear Miss Favarger ! ..."

"Miss Favarger be blowed!" She spoke like a
school-girl. She caught, as a monkey does, at the lapel
of his coat — fumbled at it. . . .

"For God's sake," she said, "don't insult me so!
Come in for a moment ! "



II

Wald Ensor came back to his flat in Ebury Street
some time in the early piping dawn and found a cable-
gram lying in his letter-box. It told him of the sudden
death of a distant but beloved relation, out in California,
a man in whose business he had a concern. A day or
two later he had arranged his affairs and sailed for the



Digitized by



Google



THE TIGER-SKIN 249

other side. He had found time before he left to forward
a bulk)r package to Miss Adelaide Favarger, containing
the skin of a leopard which he had shot himself, and of
which he had spoken to Adelaide. It went with her,
somehow, and she had looked flattered when he said so.
He had now a very friendly feeling towards her, she
seemed to him, on the whole, since their mutual experi-
ence, to be a saner, worthier member of the community
than before.

He did not fancy, when he stepped off this hemisphere,
that he was leaving Europe for a very long time. But
it was so. He married out in California. He conceived
it to be out of pity in some sort, an idea of giving a girl,
much buffeted by fortune, a home. But as a matter of
fact Adelaide had awakened the zest of the eternal femin-
ine in a man who had imagined himself to be a confirmed
bachelor. The girl was saved, domesticated, but Wald
Ensor's attempts at civism and paternity were not
blessed in the usual way. After they had been married
five years his wife died in giving birth to a child, which
died too. Then he drifted, bereft of his casual impetus
towards a settled life. His cousin died, leaving him
fairly well off. He started several adventures in the
world of business, nearly all of which failed, for he had
not what is called la main heureuse.

With an orange grove that did not pay, left on his
hands, ^nd nothing else to speak of, he came back to
Europe. Temporarily crippled in his resources, he
decided to lie low till matters should have righted them-
selves. He was too proud to take his place in society,
and go out while his only dress suit was shiny at the
knees. He avoided London. He did, however, call in
Portland Place and found new inmates established there,
and was told that old Dr. Favarger was dead and Miss



Digitized by



Google



250 TALES OF THE UNEASY

Favarger gone, no one knew where, and that she had
taken the cook with her.

It was in Yorkshire on a market-day, in Beverley, that
he met Adelaide again.

At first sight she seemed very little altered, only he
realized that he had always imagined that she was taller.
She was walking with her old staccato step that sug-
gested some congenital weakness, such as a slightly
stiffened spine, on the rough cobbled stones of the
market, about and among the pens and improvised folds
that prisoned lowing cows and calves and indifferent,
sullen bulls. She was not alone. Her companion was a
Sg b eautiful girl qf sp oilt fjff ppn T a whole head taller than
herself. Perhaps that was why he thought her shrunken ?
There was about her a slight countrified air, which
differed greatly from the exaggerated, rather meretricious
style in which the old Adelaide had been used to make
her points, and strive to enhance her own peculiar charm.

The two women were absorbed. They were leaning
on the well-worn wooden rail, which served to pen in
the unruly cattle, and watched with interest and attention
the movements of a magnificent young bull, which had
as nearly as possible succeeded in wrenching his neck
free from the clumsy headstall that fixed him to the post.
His discontented, inflamed eyes, his stubby, determined
shoulder, the dull, passionate tntentness on freedom
manifested by his attitude seemed to fascinate^he elder
woman, who was expatiating on his beauties to the seem-
ingly less interested spectator beside her. . . .

"Nice beast, isn't he, Phillis?" she murmured.

"Yes, but he'll get his head out in about a minute ! "
the child said nervously.

"Then it will be Hell let loose," replied the elder
woman, evidencing a - sort of savage enjoyment in the



Digitized by



Google



THE TIGER-SKIN ^51

spectacle of the younger one's timidity. She continued,
gloating, "He'd have the whole place cleared in no time.
Shall we stay and see the racket ? "

Her hand stole towards the frayed rope. . . .

"No, don't undo it, Addie. Oh, I do believe you're
going to ! Do let's go home," the child pleaded pet-
tishly. "And Mary must be tired and cold, waiting in
the car all this time."

"Oh, damn Mary ! " said Adelaide. "Who cares for
Mary?"

"But I'm tired and cqW too."

"You are? Come along then, my precious — a.t once."

She turned and faced Wald Ensor. The long last
look with which she had enveloped the splendid, sullen,
restless animal had not left her humid eyes.

Quickly she recognized him, and righted herself. She
put up to her eyes, with a reminiscence of her town
manner, a pince-nez that hung round her neck by a chain
of antique workmanship, and said in a hard voice —

"Is that you?"

Then a marked hesitation seemed to overcome her.
She raised her arm that hung languidly down at her side,
as if to ward off a blow. A little collection of parcels
she was holding together by a string fell to the ground.
The child very properly bent to pick them up. Ensor
properly, too, was about to forestall her, but a gesture
from Actelaide seemed to him to be intended to prevent
and forbid him doing so. There was an awkward
pause. . . .

Then Adelaide, indicating with her pince-nez the
stooping figure of the beautiful young girl, and looking
carefully away, pronounced quickly —

"Wald, my daughter, Phillis."

" How do you do ? " said Wald Ensor, formally, when,



Digitized by



Google



252 TALES OF THE UNEASY

her cheeks reddened with stooping, the child resumed
her upright position. NShe was concerned because one of
the parcels was missing. Perhaps it had rolled under
the feet of the bull ? . . . v

"Never mind," said her mother fondly. There was a
loving pride in her voice. None of the lowing cows,"
untethered, but morally fast anchored to the posts where
their calves were firmly bounden, tHeir mother-love taken
into strict consideration by the cunning drover, who
relied on it more surely than on any rope that was ever
spun of hemp, could boast a tenderer, more maternal
solicitude. Ensor was touched. So the restless, theoretic
Adelaide was happy and settled at last, her hopes ful-
filled, her theories carried out.

Phillis, in her bucolic completeness and obvious ster-
ling health, was a maternal production to be proud of.
She had golden hair, blue eyes and a complexion of
roses and again roses. There were hardly any lilies, and
although she was lovely at fifteen, the chances were that
she would be raddled at fifty. Ensor noticed that the
bare hand that clutched the wooden rail was, unlike her
mother's, large and heavy. She probably had feet to
correspond. The dark, bushy eyebrows, which struck a
note of savagery in the simple, placidly sensuous counte-
nance, suggested one coarse progenitor ; Adelaide's was
an excessively refined type. He surmised that she had
in effect succeeded in capturing something in the nature
of a prize-fighter for a mate. Such, she had declared,
was her ambition to do in the old days at any rate, some-
thing rustic, fair and Saxon. ...

Adelaide released her underlip, which she had drawn
in and had bitten till it bled, and spoke quickly, with a
graceless, oppressive cordiality that reminded Ensor, at
that moment, of the first time she had invited him to
dinner in Portland Place. In her access of nervous ex-



Digitized by



Google



THE TIGER-SKIN 253

citement, as of one constantly expecting to be refused,
she was exactly the same, uncertain, deprecating, but
peremptory.

" Where are you staying, Wald ? At the Antelope ?
Here on business? Well, you can do it from High
Walls. We'll motor you in every day. Let us go and
get your things out of the Antelope. The car's there —
waiting for us "

" Thank you — I hardly think I " so Ensor was

saying at intervals, and continued to say. He felt
annoyed, hustled, overborne by all the methods of an
aggressive, overweening personality. Adelaide's love
of domineering had once been modified by youthful
languor; now her masterfulness was reinforced by
physical fitness. She had grown out of the delicacy of
the young girl, and was well, a woman to count with.

He thought of this as he walked behind her and Phillis
through the thronging market-place. She talked to him
over her shoulder, hardly listening to his objections.
They threaded the crowd. Fusty interested groups were
collected round this or that shrewd cheap Jack. He
extolled, in the clearings they willingly made for him,
now yards of tawdry lace, now pieces of coarse netting
warranted never to tear, now rough crockery warranted
never to break. And Ensor could hardly hear Adelaide's
unmodulated voice, through the clatter of hoofs on the
stone causeways as the clumsy, puzzled animals were
run along them at a gallop by sweating, panting stable-
boys, anxious to exhibit their paces to intending pur-
chasers. Adelaide would stop dead every now and then
and become absorbed in the contemplation of melan-
choly stallions with straw-plaited tails, which stood,
their shiny black hocks turned outward, all adown the
smooth bits of stone flagging intersecting the rough
cobbles.



Digitized by



Google



254 TALES OF THE UNEASY

Ensor, to call her attention to his protests, punctuated

his remarks at intervals with, "My dear Mrs. " She

took no notice, and if she heard, did not care to supply
the name. Now and again Phillis would turn and smile,
a sweet irresponsible smile, at him and sketch an inviting
gesture. Ensor liked all children, and especially girls of
that age, and after one of these little demonstrations fol-
lowed with less travail of the spirit and fewer protests.
He rather wanted, too, to see the Mary "be-damned"
who was said to be waiting, cold, tired, and neglected
in the car.

They had reached the outer fringe of booths, the
raucous voices of cheap Jacks and the heartrending
moos of the cows faded out of hearing, and the broad
street in front of the Antelope Inn, before whose open
yard door many conveyances stood, lay before him. He
crossed the road and was now faced with the immediate
problem of acceptance or refusal of Adelaide's invitation.

There was another child in the motor, hunched up and
cowering among the rolling swathes of the leather motor
hood pushed back. She was obviously cold and tired of
waiting. She seemed about ten years old. Her dull
eyes fixed themselves on him stupidly, wearily, with a
kind of painful animal interest. . . . She did not take
them off him. Her white, wide, flat face did not light
up in the least when Adelaide approached, and in reply
to Ensor's tacit inquiry, said briefly —

"No, not mine. The cook's. You remember Gertrude
— the cook that couldn't cook? Ha! ha! Didn't you
worry me about it ? I have Mary here for her health,
and I leave her in the car because she's afraid of cows.
Now, Phillis, be quick, go and get the things at Storr's,
and come back. It's a fairly long run home, Wald. . . ."
She busied herself with some rugs. . . .

Phillis departed, saying in a child's flirtatious way as



Digitized by



Google



THE TIGER-SKIN 255

she obeyed her mother's request, "Now mind you come,"
while Ensor slavishly entered the hotel, sought his
room and gathered up his belongings. The other child
seemed to him to have seconded the invitation too, in
her own dreamy, spiritless way. It touched him. He
fancied he might cheer her up a bit if he could once get
her to take to him and gain her confidence. Children
liked him.

When he came out of the hotel again Phillis and the
other child were safely stowed away in the back of the
car under one rug, pressed up against each other to
keep warm. They seemed to get on very well together,
Ensor was glad to see.

Adelaide invited her guest to take his seat in front
beside her, and they started.

• ••«•••

Adelaide drove in a careless, slapdash way which sug-
gested the hand of little practice. She took risks, she
showed ignorance of some fundamental rules of safety.
This, however, did not disconcert Ensor at all, he had
plenty of physical courage. Full tilt they ran along dull
lanes and roads, blackish under foot, hedge-bordered in
a sullen craven green. The Plain of York in all its
mediocre dreariness unrolled itself before them. Ade-
laide, from between her pursed lips, made no attempt to
point out landmarks or objects of interest. There were
no interesting features to point out. Dull bryony shoots
and clematis tendrils were spread over the hedges, like a
dusty net coverlet on a lodging-house bed, neutral-tinted
nettles carpeted them at the foot, and at due intervals in
their extent, clean, neatly-made gates shut off the entry
into fields each one like the other. The same kind of
stupid, spiritless bird rose up now and again, and
lighted on the tedious brown furrow that hid the one
behind it. Mean clumps of trees that veiled no possible



Digitized by



Google



256 TALES OF THE UNEASY

trysting-place, bordered the road or looked over it here
and there. Ensor heard the little girls behind him
whispering and chuckling in the well of the carriage
where they had declined in laughing avoidance of the
cold wind that blew steadily over the plain. At least he
heard Phillis's voice and took Mary's for granted. The
two seemed to be very good friends.

And then Adelaide began to talk to him in her wire-
drawn inartistic tones which suggested to Ensor some-
thing like a rope, lashing, being trailed along a gravel
walk, for he longed to bid her lift it, to try to get
taut now and then. The crude passion that smouldered
in her eyes, only lent an edge to her voice. It always
did. When his mind dwelt on the changes in her, he
could think of no feature that had altered much ip twelve
r*>j{£g£g, except her mouth which, from having been as
nearly as possible straight, had now lost all suggestion
of curve, and opening generally in raspishness, closed
always in a helpless peevishness. Her face reminded
him of the matronly yet at the same time old-maidish
faces of those mentally starved, materially satisfied
women of the Renaissance he had seen in pictures and
reproductions. It was the same drawing over the cheeks,
the same anxious slope of the flesh away from the con-
sumptive peaks and hollows of the bones. Her nervous
little hands, clawlike, handled the wheel with ill-regulated
vigour and obstfnate determination to excel. Her vanity
amused Ensor, and since it made so decidedly for effici-
ency, commended itself to him. He liked women to
show grit, and did not on the whole object to be managed
by any person exhibiting marked competency.

As he reckoned, she had to give most of her real
attention to the driving of the car. Her vanity stimu-
lated her to attempt to pay off her guest with a conversa-



*>



Digitized by



Google



THE TIGER-SKIN 257

tion composed of ideas long since formulated by herself
or others.

" Isn't it a grim country ? " she said cheerfully. "They
say that there are more heirs and heiresses of solitary
habit and tottering reason to the square inch here than
in any other county in England. You see," she knitted
her brows, " these old feudal people have all along paid
no attention to physiological rules ; they have chosen to
intermarry so fearfully."

"Your old preoccupation, eh!" said Ensor, smiling.

"Don't sneer, Wald. We met and took to each other
on that ground, you remember, and I am keener on it
than ever. I hate anything of a misbegotten or deformed
nature like death or sin, which indeed it is." She looked
at him keenly. "Do you know if I was not a Christian
woman I should find myself beating Mary here within
an inch of her life ? "

Ensor made a sound indicating his wish and his con-
viction that it were proper that she should lower her
voice. Adelaide accepted the criticism and to some
extent heeded its remonstrance, in the next few words
she said.

"But as she's poor faithful old Gertrude's unique
scion I stay my hand, and give her instead Parrish's
Food."

"It's very good of you," Ensor murmured, oppressed.
He remembered the baby in the chest of drawers, and,
besides, he felt those big helpless opaque-seeming eyes
of the child in the car behind, plumb in the middle of
his back. . . .

"Dead against my own theories too," Adelaide went
on. "That sort of distinct evidence of a parent's physio-
logical failure ought to be stamped out at birth."

"Perhaps," said Ensor slowly and strainedly. "Per-



Digitized by



Google



258 TALES OF THE UNEASY

haps she is going to be a poet ? I fancy Keats had those
beautiful suffering eyes."

" Eyes of a sick monkey, pah ! " ejaculated Adelaide,
brutally, and as loudly as she had ever spoken before.
"Let us not think of her. Tell me all about yourself."

Wald Ensor obeyed and gave her an account of his
doings during the last twelve years. As he talked in
the even, rather tame manner which in him was accent-
uated, not diminished, by deep feeling, he was conscious
all the time of a duel waged within him by two opposing
but strong moods.

One side of him longed to lay his hand on Adelaide's
and get her to stop the car, and allow him to step out of
the range of her puissant personality, which alarmed
while it interested him. The other side, the explorer-
adventurer side, divorced from her image, wanted to
stay and see it through, and have another look at the
two youthful beings for whom Adelaide was making
herself responsible, more especially the cook's ailing
child. One long, attenuated, but distinct thread of pas-
sionate feeling linked him to her. . . . He had felt like
that towards a monkey from a Jropical island on the ship
that the captain was bringing home to colder climes, and
which resented it in sadness and melancholy.

With regard to adventure, he could not help wonder-
ing if when they reached a place called High Walls,
where Adelaide said she lived, a fond husband would
come to the portal, and welcome his wife and the stranger
she had chosen to bring home. For Adelaide had volun-
teered no information about herself on that head, and he
was too shy, or too apprehensive of difficulties to ask
for any. He only gathered that she was well off and had
bought High Walls herself, for Dr. Favarger had left
his only daughter everything.



Digitized by



Google



THE TIGER-SKIN 259

Ensor expected, he knew not why, that the car would
turn in at some majestic drive, bordered by fine old trees.
He was the more surprised when after going for half-a-
mile or so along a bit of road bordered by hedges on
one side, and a high brick wall on the other, overhung
by heavy elm-trees, Adelaide stopped the car opposite a
small sunk door in this very wall.

"I live here," she said. "Wald, will you ring?"

Rooks cawed from their nests in the clumps of high
trees that seemed to fill all the enclosure, and a dog
barked, evidently hearing the noise of the car and anxious
to welcome its mistress. Ensor, as he stood in the road-
way after having pulled the long iron handle of the bell,
had the sense of being at the postern gate of some
embattled fortress standing tall and grimly self-contained
in the gloomy plateau of the Wolds.

Time passed. No one came to the door, the dog inside
barked fitfully. Adelaide's voice sounded unreal in the
great spaces. . . . Yet she was talking as people talk
in cities.

" Nice old place ! " she was saying jauntily. " I bought
it, it went so well with my own peculiar mentality. It
belonged to one of the crocky-minded noblemen I told
you of ; he came to need only one room — somewhere else
and padded — so I got it cheap, freehold and all. It takes
delightfully few servants to keep it up, and that's what I
like. I hate servants spying. What are mine about.
. . . Hollo!"

She stood up in the car and called out. Her voice was
not good. At last, a shuffling old manservant appeared,
and stood holding the door, not attempting to make him-
self useful in any way. It was Ensor who helped Ade-
laide out. Then he turned to the two children. . . «
Phillis had already leaped out. Ensor looked keenly at

S2



Digitized by



Google



260 TALES OF THE UNEASY

the other child, sitting or rather crouching in the wide
seat. Their eyes met for a moment. Then Adelaide
seemed to intercept them.

"Mary, stop in the car! . . . No, she may as well
come round with us," she said fussily.

The man got in and took the vehicle off somewhere,
and piled with motor-rugs, Ensor stumbled after Ade-
laide and the two children. A narrow path, flagged
with stones, not a carriage drive, led up the very short
way to the house. On the steps an ugly puppy rushed
at them, and covered Phillis with damp paw-marks.
The child tried to abash and quieten it, in vain. Ade-
laide in her unnatural, would-be forcible tones, called it
off, and bade it come to her. The dog obeyed, but in
Ensor's opinion, without enthusiasm.

Adelaide seemed to think differently. "You see,"
she said. "He loves the hand that chastens him. I
do the chastening. I have to, all these people are so
tender-hearted, except Gertrude — she has good strong
hands."

" I do hate to hear it howling, Addie," remarked Phillis.

"All young things," said her mother, gravely, "need
to go through a period of misery and due correction
before they are fitted for social purposes. And this is a
good dog, or you bet I shouldn't keep him or trouble
about him at all. I hate mongrels, human or otherwise,
don't you, Wald?" . . .

Her eyes hardened, embittered in expression, fell on
the puny child, who held an immense rug that trailed
on the ground beside her. She was evidently too shy
or helpless to put it down or act at all until an order was
expressly given her. Ensor took the rug from her. She
did not look up. He began to think this instance of
Adelaide's philanthropic kindness was half-witted. . . .



Digitized by



Google



THE TIGER-SKIN 261

"Go in, Mary," said Adelaide sharply. "Don't stand
fiddling there ! "

• ••••••

Some one did thrash the puppy next day, for Ensor
heard it howling loudly beneath his bedroom window.
Its cry was for all the world like that of a child that was
being beaten. He could not rest in bed through the
noise, though he knew well enough that dogs must be
trained. He rose and employed the hour or so thus
gained on the day to examine carefully the position of
the room he was in, its means of exit, etc., in the style of
all well-seasoned travellers. He then put on his hat
and went out by a back entrance, half stumbling over
and apologizing to a small child in a cotton frock who
was scrubbing the steps of it. He examined the shape
of the house, the extent of the garden, and counted the
number of tall elm-trees that surrounded it, and were in
their turn circumscribed by the high, dull brick wall that
gave Adelaide's house its name.

High Walls was a composite building, finished in late
Georgian period, but including portions dating from
almost every period after Elizabeth. The Elizabethan
part was more or less built up in the interior. A Georgian
architect of the worst years had carefully enclosed and
hidden it away, and faced all with a frontage that
offended every canon of art and taste and depressed every
eye as well. The high brick wall, Ensor fancied, repre-
sented a still more recent addition, for the hideous expen-
sive portal and colonnade of the facade which had been
evidently designed to dazzle the countryside, was dwarfed
and crushed out of all proportion by the encroaching
circumference which ate up both air and space, and gave
the house the air of an asylum or a prison.

His voyage of , discovery ended, he went quietly in by



Digitized by



Google



262 TALES OF THE UNEASY

the front door in the middle of the colonnade, and found
himself in a shiny-floored hall, carpeted here and there
with wild beast skins, among which he recognized his
own handsome present to Miss Adelaide Favarger. One
corner of the hall, rendered rather dark in daylight by
the pillars of the colonnade, was palisaded off with old
German screens, or arm-chairs that successfully fended
off draughts from the front door, and permitted it to be
used as a lounge and smoking-room.

It was panelled with oak and furnished in the old-
fashioned regulation country-house style in dark browns
and yellows. Several heavy antlered heads of deer hung
on the walls. Their sad, glassy eyes leered down pen-
sively. He noticed, as he went round, pince-nez in hand,
that there were some very good engravings. But they
all embodied the usual gloating cruelties of the sports-
man. There was a print of the fighting deer of Landseer
with antlers interlocked till death, another of the rabbit
in the trap, and one of the stag pulled down by its yelping
enemies. All these famous works of art were repugnant
to Ensor. He was, if he thought about it, inclined to
be anti-vivisectionist.

On the broad hearth, although it was July, charred
logs rested on the iron dogs and fell slowly away into a
bed of soft grey ash, the reduced ghosts of themselves.
There was a growing heap of detritus that was never
buried or cleared away. The gnawing flame lurked there
somewhere at its heart, but gave no warmth, and the
man, used to Californian summers, felt chilly and longed
to stir the logs, though it was summer, into some sem-
blance of wintry activity.

He knew how to behave, however, and taking up an
out-of-date local paper that was lying about, he sat
down with a patient eye on the. main staircase which he



Digitized by



Google



THE TIGER-SKIN 263

expected his hostess to presently descend. The paper
was dull to the uninitiated in local gossip, and he
dropped it and began to go over again in his mind the
last words that Adelaide had said to him as she ascended
that very staircase last night. One small, finely-shaped
foot was on the stair. With her small housekeeping
letter-bag in one hand — the bag he had never seen her
without since they came to High Walls — she had held
out to him the other hand, saying gravely, without
suspicion of vulgar archness —

"Good-night. Sleep well. I shan't."

He had said nothing, disconcerted, but had let her go.
He was outraged, not so much by her words, as by the
look with which she had punctuated them. It made him
remember, with an intense, shy, conscious memory, the
last time he had seen her eyes as she had turned to him
on the gas-lit doorstep — the eyes of a sick monkey — she
had given him the phrase herself — the yellow sofa in
its corner at Portland Place — the wide gleaming door-
step again, when placated, reproachless, seeking not to
bind him, she had let him out into the dawn.

He had begun by admiring her for her fine non-depre-
catory attitude, her bold reliance on the social and moral
efficacy of her own standards and principles. She denied
nothing, deprecated nothing, dropped nothing. The
yellow sofa was there, in the hall, he had recognized it
overnight, a handsome piece of furniture. He had not
supposed that she cared to invest it with sentimental
recollections of her old home and her maiden days. Or
did she ?

He brooded over the ways of women, of which he
proudly supposed himself to know nothing, when a
female servant came through the outer hall, bearing
to-day's paper, which she laid down on the yellow



Digitized by



Google



264 TALES OF THE UNEASY

cushions beside him. He had no time to ask her a
question as to Adelaide's morning plans, for she quickly
passed back again through the red baize door that led,
so Ensor imagined, to the kitchen region. She left the
door open. A waft of sounds came to him, voices, one of
which he fancied was the voice of the famous and omni-
potent Gertrude, on whom so far he had never set eyes,
while the other he knew to be Adelaide's. She was
already down and afoot, then; she was a good house-
keeper, and gave her orders early?

She was evidently holding the handle of the door pre-
paratory to coming through, finishing a sentence which
he did not hear. The tone in which Gertrude permitted
herself to answer her mistress set him against her ; it was
raucous, coarsely good-humoured, and her speech, of
which he caught fragments here and there, grossly
familiar.

"With me? You've told Phillis? Well, that's quick
work, I must say ! "

"It's got to be done," Adelaide replied sturdily, he
heard her. "And the sooner the better."

"The other '11 miss her!"

"That can't be helped. You needn't mind— Phillis '11
profit. This very day, mind ! "

There was a pause. The cook had gone back into the
kitchen some little way before she replied, and the vicious
emphasis with which she spoke was accentuated by the
clang of a dish, roughly set down on some pantry shelf
or other.

"I don't mind, but it seems a queer sort of way to go
and treat your own flesh and blood ! "

Adelaide let the door go sharply and, bag in hand,
came forward to greet her guest. She had not expected
to see him already down, and said so. She looked exces-



Digitized by



Google



THE TIGER-SKIN 265

sively handsome, if a trifle pale, as she pushed her hand
through the cloudy swathes of hair that lay across her
forehead. With characteristic crankiness, she arranged
her hair across, not over or back from her fofehead. It
became her.

She stood chatting to her guest, telling him that break-
fast was not ready yet, for that lazy little Phillis, whose
business it was to make the tea, had had a fit of temper
this morning early, and was not dressed yet. While she
was speaking, Phillis looked over the banisters, and
addressed her mother, calling her by her Christian name,
a fashion that Ensor disliked. He fancied that perhaps
the child was allowed, nay enjoined to do so, in order to
minimize the effect of her size and the precocious develop-
ment on the age-estimation of her mother, a natural
weakness to which Adelaide, like other ladies, was prob-
ably prone.

"Oh, Addie ! " the child said appealingly. "Mayn't I
really have Mary to sleep with me any more ? "

"No," replied Adelaide. "It is high time Gertrude
began to train her. . . . Now, don't worry, it would be
poor kindness to keep her any longer with you, spoiling
a good servant and unfitting her for her station. Go in
and make tea."

Phillis obeyed sulkily. Ensor was glad to see her put
up a good fight for her companion.

Adelaide perched with a childish movement on the
arm of the sofa, showing a pretty ankle in its openwork
stocking. She looked like a handsome, capable gipsy, as
she sat there, dangling her everlasting bag. . . .
• ••••••

"I've been asking Gertrude," she said carelessly, "if
she remembers you, and she says she does. You must
look her up after breakfast."



Digitized by



Google



266 TALES OF THE UNEASY

"But I never saw her ! " he said, unwillingly, remem-
bering her voice so lately heard. "You mean your cook
in Portland Place ? "

" Not much of a cook, was she ? But so faithful. And
I needed it. She needed me. She had a lover who was
a prize-fighter, and he deserted her and left her with that
wretched child you've seen, to keep. ... It is a case of
atavism, I expect, for he was a fine fellow."

"Was that she beating the dog this morning? "

"Yes. She's got good strong hands."

An exultant gleam, an instantaneous flicker, as
though by some new unexpected mode of invention, he
had been afforded a kodak view of the suddenly pro-
truded forked tongue of a viper, crossed Ensor's excited
vision. He shuddered. And Adelaide suddenly, but
with an air of intense premeditation, slipped off the arm
of the sofa and kissed him.



Ill

Impelled by the sudden fruition of all that was morbid
in his nature, Wald Ensor, towards the end of the year,
married Mary Adelaide Frances, the widow of J.Dibben,
Esq. It is a fact that until he bestirred himself to apply
for the licence, he had not known the name of the father
of Phillis. Adelaide never refused but seemed to prefer
not to speak of him. Ensor supposed that Dibben, a
healthy, ordinary man of no preponderating degree of
intellect, had quickly managed to alienate and embitter
a capricious, easily-bored woman like Adelaide. He
was too modest to imagine that he himself amused her
or interested her to any great extent, but at all events,
he thought she considered him adequate, In his corn-



Digitized by



Google



THE TIGER-SKIN 267

pany, she appeared to find the nearest approach, for her,
to a state of repose. She took possession of him, body
and soul. He realized it faintly. She even seemed to
have made some slight sacrifice of her individuality with
a view to enslaving him completely. Though to every
one else her manner was curt, unpleasant and at times
unbearably arrogant, she stayed her savage tongue and
curbed her domineering temper whenever it came in
direct contact with her husband. And even had she
allowed her natural acerbity full play, the fact that she
was now about to become a mother for the second time,
called forth all Ensor's chivalry and tenderness.

He rejoiced greatly at his approaching paternity.
The want that had been created deep in his heart by
the premature death of his child out in California was
about to be completely satisfied; the void that for
lack of a better he had filled with Adelaide's child,
Phillis Dibben, he had adopted openly; while, secretly,
Mary, her foster sister, as he in his heart called her,
was far dearer to him. Phillis Dibben was unsympa-
thetic, he did not think hers was altogether a nice nature,
but still she was a child, and Ensor's love of children
was a real and true sentiment.

Though Adelaide and he had met first on the common
ground of their philoprogenitive instinct, Ensor had
come t.o suspect that his own was the truer development
of it. Adelaide admired healthy, presentable specimens .
of the class only, and the beauty of Phillis as an un-
deniable guarantee of her own Eugenical perfection
afforded the amount of toll to her vanity, the satisfaction
of her pride that was needed to evoke the motherly in
her. It was the only motive that swayed her, Ensor
thought. Or else why did she so neglect the cook's
unhappy progeny, the child she had begun by petting,



Digitized by



Google



268 TALES OF THE UNEASY

and more or less treating as her own ? He could not
forget that he had seen Mary, now degraded to a servant,
on the day he had come across her in Beverley, sitting
in the car with Adelaide's own child. The turn was too
sudden. It outraged his sense of decency.

Ensor, whose large heart was capable, where children
were concerned, of embracing the halt and the maimed
and the eugenically incorrect, could hardly endure to
let the question stand over till Adelaide was more fit
to deal with it. He constrained himself to do so, how-
ever, and contented himself with speaking kindly to the
little girl whenever he met her on the stairs or in the
corridors. She did not walk, she crawled; he had an
idea she was slightly deformed? He realized that it
was Mary he had stumbled over that first morning as
she knelt by a side door into the garden, feebly scouring
some stone steps. Her translation from the padded seat
of the car to the hard stones she was washing had been
so sudden that he could not easily conceive it to be she.

After a while he did speak to Adelaide. She made no
mystery of it. She was a woman of her word, and Mary's
play days were over. Yes, it was true, she had until
then been more or less brought up with Phillis, had
shared her room and her meals and walks and games.
It had pleased Phillis, but she could not sacrifice a
child's whole future even to please Phillis, so now that
was over. With a sort of fiendish rationalism and want
of consistency, she condemned a child brought up,
through her caprice, in comparative ease and idleness,
to do the rough work of the house, eat inferior food,
worst of all, she subtracted her from all the softening
educative influences to which she had been accustomed.

He listened, tapping his boot with his riding-whip.
He said nothing. He thought it over. If only the child



Digitized by



Google



THE TIGER-SKIN 269

could hold on, it would of course be as well not to worry
Adelaide just now, but wait till she had got safely over
her forthcoming experience, always a severe mental trial
to women of her temperament. Then, surely, milder
counsels might prevail ; he might get Mary reinstated, a
kind of foster sister to Phillis, and that was what he
would like best. Oh, very much best, for he had the
greatest, the most absurd, tenderness for the ugly, sad
unchildish child ! But if that were impossible, if her
mistress still refused to allow it, Mary might at least
be taken out of this and sent away to some bright, well-
managed school, or home of her own class, to be pro-
perly trained and educated. He did not like the notion
of her being brought up to be a servant, she did not look
as if she would ever be strong enough. But there were

other professions. He would see ?

Meantime he did what he could for the child, and that
was very little. She never appeared in the better part
of the house that the red baize door shut off, and he
sometimes fancied that Adelaide disliked to see him
cross the threshold of it into the other. Yet the oldest
and most interesting part of High Walls lay beyond, and
Ensor was something of an antiquary, where architecture
was concerned. He did not want to annoy his wife,
however, and he was careful to conduct his architectural
investigations from the back, where the historical por-
tions of the house were situated. There Mary's work
lay, and he often spied her at her task of ablution on
steps and hearth stones, armed with a pail and a piece
of bath-brick, feebly scouring, swirling a wet rag about,
ineffectually spreading long spiderlike arms in a radius
of their length all round her and producing a dull wet
surface, to be succeeded by a bright brown sanded one,
where before all was dull, unvisited dust or dirt. She



Digitized by



Google



270 TALES OF THE UNEASY

had terribly long arms for a child of her size and age,
and she was moreover, he noticed, left-handed like him-
self. He would stand there for quite a long time looking
down on her rusty red ribbon top-knot, knowing that the
child was aware of him, but was far too well drilled to
look up and crave his notice. How had they managed
to transmogrify her so quickly, from a sort of foster
sister to Phillis, sleeping with Phillis, driving about in
the motor with Phillis and her mother, into the submis-
sive drudge who never looked up till he spoke to her,
and then with a sad cowed expression that went to his
heart ?

If she were actually carrying a heavy pail, too heavy
for her or trailing a broom long enough for a person
twice her height, he considered he was justified in taking
the pail or the broom away from her at once and trying
to learn from her the place where she wished it to be
deposited. It was difficult to get her to speak at all, and
she got shyer as the days went on. He felt, manlike,
that he could scarcely offer to go down on his knees and
scrub the stone floor in her stead, but he would have
liked to do so, for he realized that it was not a child's
work. He fancied that the School Board, if they were
aware that one of their prey was thus day by day re-
moved from every form of school training, might have
something to say about it, and dreaded some sort of
exposure for Adelaide. Mary was given no tuition of
any kind ; he was sure of it. High Walls was five miles
away from Market Weighton, and though in the nearest
hamlet, consisting of a few cottages, there was a school
that was half-a-mile distant, Mary never went beyond
the garden, if indeed she got anytresh air at all.

The place was curiously self-contained, in its girdling
walls. Adelaide did her own marketing in the motor,



Digitized by



Google



THE TIGER-SKIN 271

tradesmen never penetrated within their circumference.
As it used to be said of the house in Portland Place
that anything might go on there, so it might be said
of High Walls, Adelaide had perhaps chosen to live
here, perhaps through some affectionate analogy with
the home of her birth and the house in which her mother
had died. She had bought High Walls outright, so he
learned, she made her own gas, she kept her own fowls
and her own cows, and she ordered her clothes from
Paris, fetching large wooden boxes that had crossed the
seas, from the station herself, in the ever useful motor.
In everything she did there was a brusquerie, a jerki-
ness, a suggestion of eccentricity.

There was no doubt that for one reason or another,
from austerity, shyness and love of solitude, or simply
from lack of social instinct, Adelaide had succeeded in
creating a human vacuum all round her, an area steril-
ized of gossip. Since their marriage, before the
registrar, three months ago, Mrs. Ensor, her husband
felt pretty sure, had had no visitors. As a matter of
fact, Ensor knew of three people who said they had
driven or motored out to High Walls to pay their
respects to the lady he had married, but even if they
had done so, admittance was probably refused them.
These were the wives of men that Ensor had met about
in Market Weighton or Beverley, and who had enjoined
their women folk to call on the queer, uncivilized woman
whom this gentle, civilized man that they rather liked,
had married. It was easy for Ensor to see that she was
not popular. If people even realized her previous exist-
ence, they forbore to t^lk of her, and the call was only a
tribute to his own charm and obvious pleasant gentle-
manliness. For he was a man's man, a man whom
women are apt to find dull. But as Adelaide never went



Digitized by



Google



272 TALES OF THE UNEASY

out, never returned a call, never expected to be asked to
anything, it was easy enough to be civil to the husband,
and make him free of what there was of Society in these
sleepy little market towns. Before very long Wald
Ensor belonged to the Conservative Club of Beverley,
and was put on the Library Committee of that active little
place, while in Weighton he played golf, and adjudged
prizes. The wives' drawing-rooms knew him not or
hardly at all, he could not very well go about among
the women without Adelaide, and he did not choose
to do so.

He constrained himself to be more or less active in
whatever was going, to fulfil his trivial duties as a
citizen when they came his way, partly from a sense of
duty, partly, he fancied, because the monotony of his
existence at High Walls was slowly sapping his vitality,
dulling his good temper and sense of good fellowship.
The desire to travel again sometimes came over him
in a great wave. If it had not been for Phillis and
Adelaide, he said to himself : if it had not been for
Mary, he did not say or even think to himself — he would,
in certain irrepressible moods, have proposed it to his
wife, to leave her for a time.

He could not, somehow, talk to Adelaide now; he
thought it was because of her condition. He had come
to think that everything, including questioning, plans
and so on, must be deferred until Adelaide, in her own
phrase, was "through." She thought and talked of
nothing else. It was an event of more than ordinary
importance to her. Well, it would be over in a few
months. Then he would ask her about her social
ostracism. He would find out if it was self-incurred, a
voluntary effort on her part ? Or was it a case of sour
grapes, and had she been clever enough to make a virtue



Digitized by



Google



THE TIGER-SKIN 273

out of necessity ? She was clever enough for anything,
of that he was convinced. Or had she from pique,
temper or caprice, so obstinately refused herself at
the beginning, when first she had come to settle in
Yorkshire, that people had grown tired at last of
making overtures of friendship ; overtures that were con-
tinually repulsed by the sour chatelaine of the lonely
house, in its belt of sombre trees and solid deterrent
masonry.

He could not ask her this now, he could not ask her
anything. He literally knew nothing about the woman
he had married and taken to his breast, together with
her child and her cook and her cook's bastard, with the
name that a man unknown had given her and which he
had superseded so easily.

He did not know how long she had lived in Yorkshire,
why she lived in Yorkshire, and why she had taken a
mansion that was little better than a prison in which they
two lived immured.

To do her justice, she did not seek to prison him there
with her, she made no objection to his leaving her for
hours. She would not seemingly have minded his leav-
ing her for days, only he never did. He was held by her
lazy, picturesque indifference, by the remembrance of
the attraction of her bursts of passion in the days when
she was not, as now, concentrating every force of her
being on one single point, the bearing of a healthy child,
a wonderful child, a child that should be even more
eugenical than Phillis. He did not know that he was
weak, but he knew that she was strong and that when
he was not loving her, he was afraid of her. Yes, he,
Wald Ensor, the man who' had shot tigers and braved
artillery and dug for* gold under circumstances of almost
impossible fortitude and endurance, was afraid of this



Digitized by



Google



274 TALES OF THE UNEASY

hawk-nosed, straight-lipped woman, with the thin wrists,
the small feet and the vanishing waist.

She was ruining him, she was breaking his spirit,
making him a craven, as in another department Gertrude
the cook, with her " good strong hands " that he shud-
dered to look at, was making of Mary. Mary, her
child, the human being over, whom she had power, even'
as Adelaide his wife, had power over him. He was
sure of it. With her cruel, if necessary, training,
Gertrude was killing her child by inches. In obedience
to her mistress's strange wild theory of economics, the
warped little body of the cook's child was being maimed
and stunted, her mind dwarfed and annulled, her moral
and physical growth contravened beyond recall. For
Adelaide, with her strong will and sense of duty, was
behind Gertrude, driving her to do what she thought
was right and correct for the child of humble birth
domiciled under her roof. She was right, economically
right ', it were indeed useless and extravagantly unprac-
tical to bring up the cook's child in luxury, beyond her
station; the wrench of unfitness for her inevitable
degradation and fall to her true station in life would be
all the more severe later; on. Only Adelaide's want of
imagination, however, could inure her to the thought of
such a situation created by her own behest. Adelaide !
fond of children ! Never ! Ensor smiled bitterly under
his drooping moustache, and forced himself to remember
that Adelaide had the defects of her qualities, and that
philoprogenitiveness was not one of them. He had
gauged her aright in the old days at Portland Place, or
was it that that sly, all-seeing old father of hers had
sown the doubt in his mind ?

"Adelaide, fond of children! She only thinks she is.
Cruelty masked by philanthropy."



Digitized by



Google



THE TIGER-SKIN



275



And what was that about Mother's vanity, and its
non-negligibility as a factor? He remembered the old
man's pawky sneer as he said it.

"Cases of baby-farming" he had argued. "There's
sheer cruelty. If a woman ill-treats or even kills the
child of another, no natural feeling except cruelty can
possibly come into play, not even vanity. . . ."

Vanity ! Yes. There it was, a clear issue. The
beautiful Phillis, her own . . . petted, cherished ! . . .
And on the other hand Mary, deformed, disgraced by
Nature's hand. ... He used to hide his head in his
hands as he contemplated the terrible antithesis.

Get her away ! . . . He must ... as soon as
Adelaide had given birth to the wonderful child that was
to be hers and his ! That was settled. Meanwhile, he
suffered, strange, unreasonable torments. Sometimes
hanging about in the back of the house he would see
the hem of Mary's frock or the reach of her arm, as she
scrubbed and lathered and polished. Then, with a
groan, he would prevent himself from turning the corner
of yard or out-house, lest he actually caught sight of the
child at some one of her debilitating tasks. He would
clench his hands, stuff a great cigar into his mouth, any-
thing to keep him from rushing upon the poor waif,
lifting her up, and boldly facing Gertrude, carry her
off to America or the Antipodes.

One day, feeling he could bear it no longer, he got
on to his bicycle and rode out to Weighton, on purpose
to buy something; toys, sweatmeats, he did not know
what, for Mary. Too handsome a present might bring
down a beating, he sadly suspected; he had better get
her something to eat, something nourishing, something
that would disappear. He was about to invest in choco-
late fondants, the best, when he suddenly realized that

T2



Digitized by



Google



276 TALES OF THE UNEASY

the cook's child had been back in her proper station
full three months, and would no longer appreciate the
kind of eatables that would appeal to Phillis, who was
a gourmet. He asked for and procured the wholesome
candy, and rode home, tired and depressed. The
impulse which had sent him out was a little spent. Poor
Mary was the cook's child after all, bred to servitude,
doing only what her mother had done before her. He
was a meddling busybody and would probably only
succeed in getting the poor little creature a beating. . . .

He was thinking of Adelaide and Phillis now — of the
rich sensuous beauty of Adelaide's child, and the un-
canny handsomeness of his wife. The devilish attraction
of it swayed him, always more especially when he was
tired and overwrought. It was her eyes. . . .

However, he had got the candy, a fat packet that
ought to rejoice any normal child's heart, and on
arriving home he went boldly into the rear premises
through the red baize door, and asked where Mary
was?

Gertrude, coarse, homely, but on the whole well
favoured, suspended her chopping operations at a board,
and raising her chin, regarded him quizzically. With
a kind of good-humoured malice, so it appeared to him,
she slightly deferred her reply. . . . Then she said
calmly —

"Mary is in the scullery."

Raising her voice she called —

"Mary! You're wanted."

Quickly, obediently, a drooping, crestfallen figure of
infancy appeared and stood in the sunlight that poured
through the doorway, flung from a wide open window
far back in the room she came from. It irradiated the
ground she stood on and the filmy mass of cobwebs over



Digitized by



Google



THE TIGER-SKIN 277

her head ; it could not light her up, any more than the
bogey in the fields which flaps lank and dull in the full
glare of noontide. And this was a living child, rendered
by what means he knew not, unsusceptible, like any
scarecrow, of light and joy. The depressed red bow on
the top of her head looked as if it had not been untied
for weeks. The hem of her skirt was partially torn
off, it was far too long for her, and she had fastened,
or some one had fastened it up for her, clumsily with
a piece — two pieces of string. It showed a dirty pair of
knickerbockers.

She stood, waiting patiently, blinking a little, hideous,
shapeless, piteous. Gertrude said nothing but looked
from one to the other, comparing them as it were, enjoy-
ing herself quietly, like a rough in the front row of
the pit.

. After a while, as if the play had lasted long enough,
she said —

"Come here ! I'll put a pin in for you."
Mary came shuffling up, not unwillingly. She did not
seem to dislike her mother, that is all that could be
said, and Ensor was glad to be able to think it possible
that Gertrude was not always unkind to her. But such
shocking neglect, even if there had been no excessive
corporal punishment, was culpable. He stood, handling
the packet of sweets dubiously, while the mother pro-
ceeded, with many a shake and pull, to modify her child's
disorder, which she had the sense to see injured her in
the opinion of her master, if master he could be called
who had no authority. At last summoning his courage,
Ensor pulled out the packet and put it into Mary's
hand as she stood there, pending the adjustment of
clothes that could hardly be called such, so ragged and
insufficient were they.



Digitized by



Google



278 TALES OF THE UNEASY

The sweets fell to the ground, dropped with strange
unchildish negligence from a nerveless hand. The
child did not even look up. A spasm of agony trans-
fixed the heart of Ensor.

Gertrude noticed the violent contraction of his features.
She picked up the packet of bull's eyes, and actually
inserted one into Mary's mouth. Ensor did not see if
the child retained it, for he was groping on the ground
for some of the sweets that had fallen out of the burst
packet.

"Say thank you, you silly!" Gertrude adjured the
child who stood astonished, bewildered, by such ordinary
attentions as are the usual award of the protected and
cherished young of any class. She was passive through
fright, but if she had had the spirit, it was easy to see
that her one idea was to hide, and that her eyes were
looking for a corner to run into. But her mother had
hold of her, ordering her attire, shaking her as if she
had been a small frail apple-tree.

"That's a very unsuitable length for a child's dress,
surely?" Ensor remarked, when Mary stood, hardly
erect, sheepish but disengaged at last. The peccant
undergarments were shoved into their proper place,
more or less, and concealed, and her long loose frock
was draped into paniers all round her.

"She's skinny, that's what it is !" conceded Gertrude.
"Nothing won't stay up round her! The, dress too
long, eh ? No wonder ! It's one of Phillis's that
Miss Adelaide threw away because it was too bad
for her beauty to wear. It had to do for my Mary,
hadn't it? We can't afford to have clothes made on
purpose for us, can we ? Now run away, run away and
play ! "

She grinned. Mary stood stock still.

"You're to grow into your clothes, I see," said Ensor



Digitized by



Google



THE TIGER-SKIN 279

helplessly. "Well, make haste and grow, there's a good
girl ! "

Mary smiled. Even if the gentleman's words were
absurd and irrelevant, she could not be deceived in the
kindness of the speaker's intention.

The smile, begun without spirit or brilliance, faded
out like sunlight on a wall on a rainy day. Gertrude
took up his speech, and answered it.

11 Grow ! Her ! Never fear ! Mary's one of those
stunted-from-birth ones Miss Adelaide's always talking
about. Just look at these thundering long arms ! "

She extended to its full length the gnome-like, skinny
limb to which she alluded. The owner suffered this
liberty wearily. Her stupid glazed eyes were fixed on
Ensor. They seemed to say, "Save me 1 Save me ! "
He stammered out —

"Couldn't she be sent to the sea for a month or so?
... I would arrange it. . . . That is, if you could
spare her ? "

He waited on the cook's answer agonizedly. She was
in effect the child's mother, with absolute power over it
for life and death. ...

"Spare her, Lord, yes!" answered the cook calmly.
" The work she does isn't worth speaking about. You're
nobbut a poor worker, aren't you, Mary ? " She turned
to Ensor, away from the child, but she did not trouble
to drop her voice at all —

"'Twould be no good, Sir. I'm thinking Miss
Adelaide's begun her grand training too late."
"What d'you mean?" he asked.
"She'll be training her into her grave, that's what
she's doing."

"Sh— h ! for God's sake, woman ! " he muttered, and
sought his wife. Something must be done.



Digitized by



Google



280 TALES OF THE UNEASY

He had no authority, except, strange to say, as far
as Phillis was concerned. And though Phillis's physical
upbringing left nothing to be desired, he considered
her mental education in some ways to be defective.
Adelaide placed no obstacle whatever to his realization
of certain views he had formulated and insisted on to the
verge of tediousness with regard to the moral standards
to be inculcated in a young growing girl.

She listened patiently, while he exposed these theories,
and her thin lips wore something more nearly approach-
ing to a smile at these times than any other, while her
husband thus took a practical interest in the future of
her daughter. He reasoned broadly, and generally ; he
could not lay his whole mind before the wife of Phillis's
father. For that father counted, and not, in Ensor's
idea, favourably. Phillis had certain strongly marked
tendencies which he deplored, and which he conceived
her to derive from the parent he did not know. She
had undoubtedly a strain of the coarse and the callous ;
her father had probably had these characteristics more
strongly developed. She had also some disagreeable
qualities that he distinguished in and traced from
Adelaide, and that careful training might cross and deny
and finally eradicate. She was sly, she was morbid,
she was headstrong and reckless of the claims of others.

So, acting with Adelaide's authority, delegated to him,
unquestioningly, he kept a strict watch and supervision
on the books she read, and the conversations she heard
or took part in. He did not countenance her frequent
visits to the kitchen and her odd indecent familiarity
with Gertrude the cook. He had asked his wife if he
might not prohibit the child from entering the servants'
quarters altogether, and seal the red baize door that led
to them against her use. He would like to forbid all



Digitized by



Google



THE TIGER-SKIN 281

entrance and egress by it, and force her to give her word
of honour that she would observe the prohibition.

"She may give it, but she won't keep it," said Adelaide
lazily. "You can't wonder. She's fond of Gertrude,
because she gives her tit-bits, and Phillis is greedy, poor
darling ! And then " — she looked up in his face —
"there's your beloved Mary! She's about, and you
must remember the two were brought up together.
They were like foster sisters before you came. You
altered everything. And now I am going to have your
child!"

He stooped and kissed her, full of premature paternal
emotion. Adelaide was supposed to be not quite
so well to-day. She was lying on the famous tiger-
skin that he had given her, and which she had spread
over a low wide couch in the hall. She chose to lie on it
always, so that the brute's savage head was close to
her own. Loving and akin, the live Adelaide and the
dead beast he had given her, both reeked of each other.
There was all the hot suggestion of the jungle, of care-
less natural savagery in the juxtaposition of the tiger's
snarling teeth, Adelaide's dusky eyes, and the spots and
splashes of black that showed on each side of her spare
form, like caked, dried blood upon the gold. It was his
wife's boast that her beautiful figure was hardly altered
by her present condition, and the shocking cruelty to
the unborn implied in this attainment of an unnatural
shapeliness was lost on the simple fellow who was so
soon to be a father.

"Our child," he said, kissing her again passionately,
"is the thing that matters."

Then the recollection of that other child went through,
pierced his heart like an arrow. He rose from his knees.
All the blood in his body came into his face. He stood



Digitized by



Google



282 TALES OF THE UNEASY

looking down on the woman, who had returned the
passion of his caress with all the force of which she was
at present capable. A large patch on the tiger-skin, a
zebra mark bitten in, zig-zagging across the yellow fur,
focussed his eyes. . . .

"Adelaide," he prayed softly, "could we not take
Mary back into the house again ? "

" No," Adelaide said. She spoke quite quietly too, but
Ensor knew her ; a storm was coming.

"Then," he said pleadingly. "Could she not be sent
away for a bit — or" — his immense struggle betrayed
itself in his voice — "for good?"

"You cannot interfere with Gertrude's business," came
plumb and sharp from Adelaide. " If Gertrude likes to
leave me, she can of course take her child away with her.
But I cannot do without Gertrude, and Gertrude will
never leave me. Ask her."

She turned away, and laid her cheek against the flat
head of the tiger.

"And I was so happy ! " she wailed, in bitter accents.

He knelt down again. Her breath came quick. He
feared for her.

"It is no use," she said. "You have spoilt it all.
And all for the sake of a dirty misbegotten little wretch
whose own mother can't stand her and beats and neglects
her. I don't blame Gertrude. Don't you understand,
Wald, Mary is one of the wrecklings, one of Nature's
faults that ought to have been smothered at birth? I
wish I had. I wish somebody had. My father would
have put her away fast enough if I had asked him, only
like a fool, I was kind to Gertrude, and saw her through
with it. But I have come to hate the very sight of the
child ! And you — you to come snivelling to me about
her. . . . You ! "



Digitized by



Google



■



THE TIGER-SKIN 283

She laughed. Her passion was spent. She looked
him, her husband, up and down, contemptuously.

He murmured: "Don't, don't excite yourself! "

"I won't," she said squarely, turning her face round
to the wall. "I'm better now. I won't let you hurt me.
I'll even discuss the unwholesome brat, if you like, that'll
show you I don't care. Get on. Talk quietly and tell
me what's wrong about Mary's upbringing."

"You are very good," Ensor murmured, "are you sure
it won't upset you?"

"No, I tell you." She sat up and faced him. She
pulled a basket of needle-work towards her and busied
herself with it. Her hands did not shake. Ensor
admired her. After all, she had no nerves, and he might
as well say his say about the child, get better terms of
existence for her, and be done with the subject. He
made up his mind he would not say much ; he would not
descend to particulars of her ill treatment unless Adelaide
asked for them. He began gently —

" I do think, don't you ? that when all's said and done,
Mary's young, and even a servant's child ought to have
some joy of its life. Mary oughtn't to be made to slave
like a grown-up. Hang it all, a simple child should
lightly draw its breath, not to the tune of housework
and floorscrubbing. The sight of that poor kid carry-
ing those heavy pails about makes me quite sick. I
should like to tell you what I saw yesterday. Gertrude
must be an unnatural mother "

"Well, speak out, what did you see? " Adelaide asked
sharply.

"You were out driving. Mary was standing by one
of the high windows in the hall "

"She'd no business to be there. Suppose a caller
came ? "



Digitized by



Google



284 TALES OF THE UNEASY

"No callers come. Why don't they, by the way ? "

"I hate people. I've snubbed them all, they daren't
show their noses here. Go on. What was your paragon
doing in the hall ? "

"She was eating something out of an enamel tin
platter such as you feed dogs in, laid on the sill. The
platter was not over clean, and I don't know what the
mess was, but it looked most unappetizing and she
seemed to be — yes, actually picking something — some-
thing disgusting — something alive out of it. ... ! "

"Pah, you sicken me!" Adelaide screamed. Ensor
went on relentlessly, now that he was wound up. . . .

" I put my hand on to her little scrubby head with that
faded knot of red ribbon on the crown "

"I wonder you can touch it. Don't touch me."

"And I told her not to eat the nasty stuff, and what
was it ? She said it was bits Gertrude cut off the toast
before it went in the dining-room, the same as the dog
had. It looked days old — quite mouldy. I shouldn't
like to give such a mess to my dog. I can only account
for it as a morbid taste of the young growing child, and
I bade her throw it away, and not eat between meals.
It shows the shocking state of health she's in, and she's
morbidly inventive, for then she said "

"What did she say?"

"That it was her breakfast. Nonsense, I said. But
she stuck to it. She seemed cowed, brutalized, but she
stuck to it. I say, Adelaide — I know you aren't very
fit jtfst now, but oughtn't you to make some inquiries?
Does Gertrude beat her or ill treat her ? I hear sounds,
of a morning sometimes — not so much lately since you've
been seedy — but they freeze my blood, until I realize
that it's the dog getting a licking. . . . Oh, Adelaide,
reassure me, don't you see a man can't stand the



Digitized by



Google



THE TIGER-SKIN 285

suspicion of such a thing in his house? A helpless
child. . . ."

The drops of sweat stood on his forehead. Adelaide
spoke, as it were a prepared speech, which it was now
time to make.

"Your house! " she said. It was hers and the man
winced, . . .

She continued, raising herself a little. "Look here!
Mary's a liar as well as a pig. You've owned it. Morbid
— is that all ? I say a filthy, beastly liar ! . . . And,
Wald, Pm going to bear your child, and if you want
to have a healthy one, born alive — you haven't had much
luck with children, so you say — you had better not worry
me. . . . Let me have this chance. I'll never try again.
I shall kill myself if this one does not come off. Sup-
pose you be wise in time, and leave off meddling in
my domestic concerns, and go and attend to your own.
You've a meeting of the Library Committee in Beverley
at three. It's full time." She glanced composedly at
the watch that lay on her breast, and lay down again
as if it were a duty. . . .

He went about his business, trying to calm down in
the quiet operation of the natural round, and the mild
form of civic functions that filled his days. Adelaide
was right, an important meeting of the Library Com-
mittee was on for to-day, at which he had announced
his intention of speaking, for the subject interested him
personally. It was a question of morals as applied to
the feast of contemporary literature spread before the
youth of Beverley and Weighton. Ensor's contention
was that as young girls formed the main contingent of
the readers of books in all provincial towns it behoved
far-seeing and right-minded city councillors to see that
no works pernicious in quality or deleterious in tone



Digitized by



Google



286 TALES OF THE UNEASY

should be delivered over to their private consumption.
Their elders, with a taste for life, spiced and otherwise,
should purchase outright the literature their souls loved,
and leave the shelves of chance to works of limpid purity
and unimpeachable if dreary moral tone.

The Library Committee was composed of enlightened
men and women, for it had been founded by an exceed-
ingly busy and fussy Mrs. Marrable, "a bit of a
Socialist," as she called herself. She was at any rate
a person professedly open to all the new ideas. The
Committee were a little afraid of her, and had come to
look to Ensor, the shy silent embodiment of Conserva-
tive, almost retrograde feeling in their midst, to oppose
her. He generally began his sentences : " I know I am
a bit old-fashioned." This was a capital counterblast
to Mrs. Marrable and her "bit" of Socialism. They
found him invaluable, a sort of slipper on the wheels
of frenzied progress, and Mrs. Marrable was not easily
gainsaid. She was a relation of the Bishop's cousin,
and had lived in Beverley for years in a big red house
where she entertained Saturday to Monday parties from
London. She had no daughters.

Another influential member, Canon St. Leger, un-
married, and living in the best house in the Close, was a
friend of Ensor's, though he had not asked him to come
in so much lately. . . \

Indeed, looking round the green baize-covered table
where all the Committee found themselves at last seated,
it occurred to Ensor that he had not shaken hands with
a single one of his confreres since the last meeting, and
that was a month ago. For that reason, he supposed,
they seemed strange to him, although they were all or
nearly all, people with whom he had been desired to
take pot luck on any occasion, lunch, or dinner, when



Digitized by



Google



THE TIGER-SKIN 287

he had ridden in from High Walls on his bicycle and
found he had put it too late to get back. All except
Mrs. Marrable, with whom for political and tempera-
mental reasons he had always cared to have very little
to do.

While the Committee dealt with some purely financial
and business matters, which called for no more atten-
tion from the members of the Committee than was
implied in passing a vote of confidence or holding up
hands for a resolution, Ensor wrought himself up into
a strange state of nervous apprehension. It might have
been mere perverse fancy, but as a matter of fact not
one of these people had spoken to him since they sat
down, or recognized his presence except by a nod of
salutation such as the barest courtesy demanded. The
attitude of each several person could be accounted for
separately. So-and-so had come in late, such a one had
too many irons in the fire to be able to spare a word till
the meeting was over, but still — there it was, the inde-
finable uneasiness, the disagreeable insinuating point
that morbid imaginings could establish. No one had
actually addressed a word to him ! . . .

He brooded over this — he was tired, overwrought and
annoyed, for the child Phillis had shown a sad racial
cloven foot to-day. He was afraid she was not going to
turn out so well as he could have wished. By and by
other business being disposed of, the Committee were
invited to deal with the question of detailed selection of
books for the Library. It was a subject on which Ensor
was keenly interested, and here he had so much to say
that he forgot his preoccupation and did not allow his
natural shyness to interfere with the expression of his
opinion. He was strongly against the determination of
Mrs. Marrable, to permit, nay, to encourage, the intro-



Digitized by



Google



288 TALES OF THE UNEASY

duction of a certain novel, the work of one of her literary
confreres, into the list of the Library. Ensor had had
the book sent him from London, so as to acquaint himself
with its supposed nature. He had carefully kept it out of
the way of his womenkind, until having thoroughly
digested it, he threw it into the fire. Yet this book was
to be placed on the shelves of the Library to which Ade-
laide subscribed, and a copy of it would be sure to find
its way to High Walls ! He could not bear the idea of
such a girl as Phillis, eager, sensuous, full of strong,
exuberant, readily-awakened sex instincts, sucking in the
unhealthy, unnecessary knowledge presented so cleverly
by this book, and it'seemed to his hypochondriacal imagin-
ings that the tendency of the rest of the Committee was to
override his objections per se. He grew tremendously
excited, and the Committee wondered to see the usually
still and discreet man, who had married the lady they
called the terrible Mrs. Dibben, make such a violent
exhibition of himself.

" I haye a nearly grown-up daughter, as you all know,"
so he ended his speech, and for the moment he felt every
inch a father. "Well, let me tell you, that I had rather
see her lying dead at my feet than realize that she was
taking into her pure mind anything so poisonous, so per-
nicious, so destructive of all moral health as the work in
question. I would rather see her starved, neglected,
maimed even, than ruined mentally by such murderous
nourishment. . . ."

He stopped, he felt that the sense of the meeting was
not with him. The silence that swallowed up the last
word was hard and disapproving. The Chairman, Canon
St. Leger, drubbed on his desk with a pencil. . . . Mrs.
Marrable, divesting herself of her feather boa with the air
of one throwing down the gauntlet, and tilting forward
her chair, rose. . . .



Digitized by



Google



THE TIGER-SKIN 289

" Do I understand ? " she said, speaking with privileged
indistinctness, but Ensor heard her for all that. "Do I
understand from Mr. Ensor's eloquent speech, that he
cares to throw his shield merely over a member of his own
immediate family ? What about the stranger within his
gates ? And I have yet to learn that spiritual injury and
moral oppression are the only enemies worth combating ?
Talk of mental starvation, indeed ! . . . Mental ! . . .
There are worse things than mental starvation. There
are blows. . . ! "

She appeared to become hysterical and quite incoher-
ent.

"Such hypocrisy • . . such disgusting hypocrisy I
never heard of. Let him look to his own house, I say —
let him set his own house in order before we put the
Society on to him ! "

"Mrs. Marrable, I must beg you to observe! This
language is impermissible here," Canon St. Leger said,
avoiding Ensor's eye and the deprecating gestures he
automatically made. ... "I must call upon you to
apologize I "

"To me," Ensor said, white to his lips.

"Oh yes, I'll apologize to the Committee," said the
lady, "and they'll accept my apology. They all know
what I mean. But in the interest of Humanity, it is
time some steps were taken, and I'll take them. . . ."

She folded her boa tightly round her neck and passed
out. Canon St. Leger swiftly put the retention or refusal
of the book in question to the vote and closed the meeting.

Ensor, dazed, his eyes blurred with unaccustomed pas-
sion, walked away like a condemned man, condemned
for a crime of which he was unwitting.

He rode studiously home, meditating on these things
to the point of falling off his bicycle. He was stunned
with the impact of the undeserved disagreeable, and knew



Digitized by



Google



290 TALES OF THE UNEASY

not what to think or whom to ask for an explanation.
And when he got home he found real trouble awaiting
him. Phillis, who had been ailing rather unaccountably
for some time past, had shown definite symptoms of
illness during his absence. The little local country
doctor, (but quite "good,") had been sent for and had
been and gone. He had pronounced the child's uneasi-
ness to be due to a mild attack of typhoid fever, so
Adelaide, afoot, her eyes alight with excitement, told the
sluggish, depressed man who dismounted from his
bicycle at the door where she came to meet him.

"Have something, Wald. You look pale. That
meddling brute of a doctor has gone and ordered a nurse
all off his own bat ! " she fretfully informed him, leading
the way into the drawing-room and closing the door. "I
was so angry with him when I heard what he had done.
Of course I should have nursed her myself. The woman
is here now so we must make the best of it."

Ensor was secretly of opinion that Dr. Hodgson was
right, and that the state of Adelaide's nerves would have
made her an indifferent nurse; he, however, contented
himself with remarking that neither himself nor Dr.
Hodgson would approve of her sitting up at night.

"But I shall have to as it is. No nurse can do^both.
And, Wald, I do so detest strangers coming into the
house 1 They go prying about, making up all sorts of
absurd conclusions and telling the ass of a doctor every-
thing. . . ."

An expression of indefinable apprehension crossed her
peevish face, and her husband was touched, taking it, as
he did, as indicating the state of nervous tension she was
in. Phillis's illness — her own condition

He took her limp hand and kissed it.

" My popr Adelaide, what have you to fear ? There's



Digitized by



Google



■



THE TIGER-SKIN 291

nothing wrong for him to find out; I don't quite approve
of the status of Mary in the house, but after all that's
the cook's affair, not ours. ... By the way. . . ."

He was going to tell her something of Mrs. Marrable's
insinuations, but concluded he had better not mention
the matter at this juncture. ... He merely asked
abruptly, "Where is Mary? I haven't seen her about
for the last few days."

M Gertrude has sent her away to some friends at Culler-
coats, I believe. She asked me if I could spare her ! M

"And of course you did, kind girl," said Ensor.

"Oh yes. The work she does isn't worth thinking
about. I told Gertrude we should never make a servant
of her. . . . Good-bye. I must go to Phillis. I want
to keep an eye on that nurse. I didn't like her face. A
mischief-maker if ever there was one."

Adelaide was gone and Ensor fell a-thinking on the
painful scene of to-day. He was obsessed, now that it
was over, by the recollection of a fluid and retreating
Committee. He saw black coats, and the grey mantelets
of the country ladies melting away from him, fleeing from
his contact. He could not account for the social ban
under which he appeared to lie. This was the culminat-
ing incident; he remembered now other slighter acts of
neglect and inattention in the past, which he had been too
little self-conscious to observe or to piece together in a
pattern of general avoidance and cold shouldering. The
arraignment of the woman Marrable did not disturb him
so much as the nervous acceptance of it by the Canon.
Mrs. Marrable was a shrew, a local terror, a person of
advanced views, and the author of the book in question
was a friend of hers, probably ? . . .

But Canon St. Leger, a decent, sober-minded man, a
man of his own stamp 1 ... He saw his thin hand toy-
u 2



Digitized by



Google



292 TALES OF THE UNEASY

ing with the suspended pencil, he heard again his meek
milk-and-water reproof of Mrs. Marrable's unparliament-
ary language. ... He could not away with that. . . .

He wandered about the garden half the night with the
puppy, now fully trained to be a perfect house-dog and
companion. It followed him in an orderly manner from
covert to covert under the high beetling wall with the
thick beds of nettles growing luxuriantly at the base.
Once, however, there was a skirmish ; the dog grew quite
excited at what must surely have been a not unusual
sight for him, the yellow knob of a small boy's head peer-
ing over the wall, supported presumably from behind by
a human Japanese ladder of other small boys. It was a
favourite game in this neighbourhood.

" He 1 He ! " they crowed and chuckled. " Who lives
'ere ? Old Mother Brownrigg and her girls. He ! He !
No one ever comes out here alive. . . ! "

The dog barked and sprang. Fear of his ultimately
reaching them at last dislodged the grotesque cohort.
Ensor, his nerves a little shaken by this noisy onslaught
of words only half heard, turned and made his way back
to the house. It was absurd to mind. Children were
always climbing up the other side of that wall ; it was
nice to climb, it had jutting courses of bricks half-way up,
and the village curiosity was provoked and stimulated by
the air of quasi-mystery which Adelaide chose to foster
about High Walls, and that her rather witch-like appear-
ance abroad, always heavily, mediaevally cloaked and
motor-veiled, abetted. She dressed like a toadstool in the
day. And in the evening like a panther. She strode
along, her step was confident, her eyes abstracted, her
whole manner carelessly insulting. No wonder the
children were afraid of her.

He went in, and saw the doctor coming out and ques-



Digitized by



Google



THE TIGER-SKIN 293

tioned him about Phillis. His anxiety was easily allayed.
The big girl was strong enough to resist a whole army
of adverse microbes. He saw the new nurse, a tall, thin
sprig of a woman with some indication of character. She
was very cold and civil, especially when she spoke to
Adelaide. He thought he saw plainly that she disliked
the mistress of the house, already. Another 1 Poor
Adelaide !

He knew he was right, as the days went on. The two
women detested each other, skirmished every time they
met, issued cross orders and confused the other servants.
But the maid defeated the mistress. Dr. Hodgson, meek,
little insignificant man that he was, resisted all Mrs
Ensor's hints and manoeuvres, and finally, her most pal-
pable efforts to get rid of Nurse Ferrier, who was, on her
side, careful to give no positive offence, or commit any
domestic crime which might lead to her dismissal on
other grounds than medical ones. She was a capital
nurse, even Adelaide admitted that, only Phillis no longer
wanted one. Hodgson said she did. He further implied
that a nurse stood between Mrs. Ensor and all fatigue or
anxiety undesirable for a woman in her state, and that
was the only argument Adelaide dared not, or did not
care to, gainsay.

The distracted woman vented her annoyance at the
doctor's tactics on her husband, and to punish him would
not let him see Phillis. As she spent most of her time
in the girl's room which opened out of her own, Ensor
saw very little of her. He found himself not very much
cast down by this arrangement; he was much out of
sympathy with his wife, a little fretted by her irritability,
and was glad to defer their meeting until the need for the
nurse's presence which so enraged her should have passed
away.



Digitized by



Google



294 TALES OF THE UNEASY

He wondered, sometimes, when that would be, and
thought he would like to ask the nurse. But she rather
sternly, and with a sort of frigidity put on over and above
her statutory nurse's manner, passed him in the hall or
on the stairs. He began to fancy that Adelaide, moved
by her strange taste for regulating the movements and
gestures of others, had bidden her enter as little as pos-
sible into conversation with the master of the house.
Well! Well! . . .

He missed Mary, to whom, in the present upheaval, he
could have paid a little more attention. Still, presumably
she was well. Adelaide had apparently carried out his
expressed wishes for once, and had insisted on Gertrude's
sending her child away for sea air. He missed the daily
appeal of the dark eyes set in paleness, the weak gestures
with her hands which Mary often used in lieu of speak-
ing, as if mere movement made less stir, and drew down
less attention on her from the cruel powers above.
Though her face was pale it was always clean, he remem-
bered. And a queer thing — he never remembered her sit-
ting down. Did she ever sit down ? He had seen her
squat, he had seen her stand, but he had never seen her
sit except that first day in the motor-car, when, the dark
fur cap on her head, and the dark fur up to her chin had
made her look almost a lady. She was dressed exactly
like Phillis, then, he remembered ! Strange monitory
caprice of Adelaide's — an instance of her sheer love of
power — to raise, and then to degrade ! No man could
do such a thing except, perhaps, some savage Asiatic
king, one in whom caprice remained the only lust left
to satisfy.

He did not care to affront such scenes as he had gone
through at Beverley any more, and he took his name off
the Committee. He stayed at home and spent this dreary,



Digitized by



Google



THE TIGER-SKIN 295

uneventful time mostly in wandering about the house
followed by the dog, who had grown attached to him. It
generally lay at his feet in the hall while he sat on one of
the yellow chairs, reading papers endlessly, smoking far
more than was good for him. Thus he caught the doctor,
on his way through the outer hall to see Phillis. The
doctor generally nodded kindly, but did not slop, there
was nothing to say about Phillis ; she was going on well,
and Adelaide did not expect to be confined for a couple
of months or so. The nurse flitted by on her screw soles,
going up and downstairs, and taking no notice of the
solitary man. He never saw Gertrude at all.

He was thinking seriously of going away from High
Walls for a time, until Phillis was quite well, and Mary
had come back, and he had got as far as the handling of
Bradshaw and the turning of the page marked Conti-
nental Trains, when one day the nurse chose suddenly to
leave the orbit in which she generally travelled, between
the red baize door into the servants' quarters and the
staircase that led up into Phillis's sick room, and came
straight up to Wald Ensor. The deflection of the moon
from her course could not have surprised him more.
She spoke.

" I beg your pardon, Sir, but have I your permission to
take Dr. Hodgson to see Mary ? "

Her eyes drooped and seemed to look down both sides
of her nose. With her white cap like a frontlet, her
brown hair fluffed out in ascetic waves over her forehead,
she was not altogether an unprepossessing woman. She
was looking down at him, her lips were coldly pursed, and
Ensor felt just as he had felt in the Beverley Committee-
room.

"Certainly, Nurse," he stammered, " But Mary, is she
at home ? "



Digitized by



Google



296 TALES OF THE UNEASY

"She is at home, Sir, and in my opinion very unwell."

" What is the matter with her ? I want to know. Mary
is a special pet of mine."

The lame, absurd words came broken from his lips.
. . . He was not thinking of what he was saying. He
was overwhelmed by an avalanche of doubts. Adelaide
had lied to him. . . . " Hasn't Mary been away at all ? "
he stammered.

The nurse raised her eyes, and gave him one straight
winged glance. . . . She had strong black eyebrows that
met across her nose, and a pout that was determined.

"She may have been. Not that I know of . . . ." Her
nose was in the air. " Will you see her, Sir ? " she ended
more kindly. "Perhaps you would like to know how she
is for yourself."

"Yes," he replied. "I should indeed. But I under-
stood she had been sent away to the sea for her health ?
Let us go. ... I don't know where she sleeps, when
she is at home. . . ."

"You shall see, Sir, if you will come with me."

Her calmness was only a mask, Ensor felt; the quiet
words covered an indignation that nearly broke through
her professional reserve. She was boiling over with rage.
She walked through the red baize door with an assured
step, never turning or looking round at the shamefaced
man who followed her with humble, downcast head, his
morning paper still crumpled up in his hand.

The red baize door marked the transition between the
oldest and most modern parts of the house. Ensor had
never been up the second and original staircase which
led to the attics, and it was these that Nurse Ferrier now
proceeded to mount. It was rather dark everywhere, for
a heavy shower was impending, the first few drops of
which had fallen before they left the part of the house



Digitized by



Google



THE TIGER-SKIN 297

where the windows were bigger. The stairs were un-
carpeted, low and uneven. They led up to wide, emaciated
corridors, whose panelling was worm-eaten, pale with
age and desuetude. Low doors, plumb in the wall,
opened into many rooms, at each of which in turn Ensor
expected the nurse to stop and enter.

Another flight of stairs, leading to just such another
corridor ! The air was faint, it seemed to have been
sealed for centuries. . . . Ensor protested . . . asked
some sort of question. . . . "Where were they going?"

"Into the attic, where Mary sleeps alone," the nurse
answered. Her manner was more kindly now.

" A child, to sleep all this way from everybody ! . . ."
he murmured.

She nodded but did not turn. They reached a short
flight of five steps, built in. Ensor was quite in the
dark, until the nurse pushed open a door at the head of
the stairs and they emerged into the twilight of a large
bare attic. When his eyes grew accustomed to the light,
he realized that it occupied the whole top of the
house.

"Give me your hand, Sir," the nurse said quite gently.
"You may get a shock. Mary's here, or was yesterday."

The attic was like the aisle of a church, with chapels
on both sides. A wide window at the very end allowed a
milky track of light to fall along the pale, decayed floor-
ing of the middle. There were small dormer windows
in the embrasures formed by old, roughly-joined beams
filled in with whitewashed lath and plaster. Each was
like a little room shut off. Towards the centre the floor-
ing was rotted away — the jagged boards seemed to meet
in a pattern of interwoven flanges.

They walked along it carefully, up to the very end, and
Ensor saw the wide stretch of rolling country out of the



Digitized by



Google



298 TALES OF THE UNEASY

big window. The nurse went along it carefully, peering
into each alcove. She seemed puzzled.

"It was this one," she said at last. "It's so dark with
the rain I can hardly see, but I was up here yesterday and
got scolded for it. . . . Here she is ! "

He stopped. His legs almost refused to move. The
child was lying on a large thin mattress just at his feet.
A shawl with ragged fringe covered her, and the dull
stained tick of the mattress showed beyond it. There
seemed to be no bed-linen, and the child's nightdress,
which might have been originally of pink flannel, was of
a curious ingrained dull colour. . . .

Ensor started, and felt sick.

"Ah, Sir, you see ? " the nurse said, and stopped.

She bent down. . . .

" Mary 1 " She had soft tones as well as harsh ones.

The child, who appeared to be dozing, opened her
eyes and turned them up at her visitors. She still had
her ridiculous top-knot straining the hair from her fore-
head, and the rest of it was matted on her face. Her
hand lay open on the shawl, the other was under her
cheek. She may have been aware of them, she did not
look at these people. Slowly her eyes closed again and
she lay quiet, a grey patch on the dark background of
the pallet.

"Mary ! " the nurse said again. "Here's Mr. Ensor
to see you. . . . Take her up, Sir," she bade command-
ingly.

Ensor knelt down and lifted the upper part of the
wretched, filthy little body half out of her bed on to one
of his knees. As he handled her he had the sensation of
her dry, harsh skin, and it reminded him of parchment.
She coughed as he unavoidably jerked her in lifting.

By his prompt obedience to her request, he had rehabil-



Digitized by



Google



THE TIGER-SKIN 299

itated himself in the nurse's opinion, as she showed by
the more familiar tone of her next speech. . . .

"Did you ever see such a disreputable nightdress?
And such a hole to let a child sleep in ? "

She went on scolding, and Ensor realized that her
abuse was directed at Adelaide. Yet it seemed an impos-
sible thing to answer her. She blamed the doers of this
deed, but in a strain so incommensurate with the depth
of the painful emotions raised in him by the sight of the
child's condition. . . . Seeing, however, that he was
feeling as he should feel, she respected his wretchedness
and spoke gently.

"She's been alone so all night, but will you stay with
her, Sir, while I fetch the doctor ? It's just on his time
for coming. I may catch him before Mrs. Ensor sees him."

She crept away. Ensor heard her gently close the
attic door. There was silence, and her heels, on the
stair, tapped . . . retreating.

Left alone in the attic with a dying child across his
knee, the man tried frantically to collect his thoughts.
Beyond a little dry, patient cough, made as it were of
ashes and dust, which racked her now and then, Mary
lay quite still across his knees. He changed his position,
and now he sat on the floor beside the mattress. His
eyes grew accustomed to the lighting of this place and
he saw that there was a small window in each embrasure,
and the one opposite him on the other side of the house
had panes. That immediately over Mary's bed was open
to the air. The glass had evidently been cracked and
had fallen out leaving jagged pieces in the frame. From
one of these there depended the fragments of a checked
cotton duster, stuffed in there by some one to ward off,
more or less, the draught.



Digitized by



Google



3 oo TALES OF THE UNEASY

The shower was over, and the sun had come out, and
sent warm rays across the worm-eaten floor, the floor
whereon in the old days the feudal servants of the manor
house had slept, weary feet to weary feet, fastened in all
night by their lord, with no egress save by the little
locked door at the foot of the staircase. The lord of old
dared not leave his slaves free to murder their taskmaster
in his sleep. There may have been at that time about a
hundred healthy farm-hands keeping each other warm
and their spirits up through the long night with jests and
story-telling; now this enormous garret held but one
sickly, fearful, solitary child.

Oh ! who had done this ? . . . His head swam with
dreadful certainties.

A great bluebottle flew in at the window, and buzzed
in and out of the rafters over Mary's head. She was past
noticing it, but it irritated Ensor and he wanted to get up
and chase it away. But he could not bear to deposit the
child on the filthy palliasse again. The same with a
cockroach that made blundering rushes from one joist to
another of the decayed ribs of the flooring. . . . There
was probably vermin in that bed, and on the child even,
but he was past caring. ... He could not beat his
breast, Mea culpa, mea culpa, mea maxima culpa! or
tear his hair ; his hands were tied, occupied with the task
they should have set themselves long months agone — the
work to which his down-pressed heart had all along in-
stigated him. But in this moment he expiated fully what
he described to himself as his rotten carelessness, his
wicked easy-going acceptance of Adelaide's excuses, his
shameful apathy in the face of the cruel crime that
was being enacted in his house — in Adelaide's house
indeed, but the shame was his. Here was a helpless
child, dying under his roof, of neglect, or worse, and
he had had the face to stand before that Committee corn-



Digitized by



Google



THE TIGER-SKIN 301

posed of decent people, and had been puzzled by their
quite natural behaviour. They were unfriendly; dis-
gusted, outraged by his pusillanimity, of which they
probably had an inkling, or more than an inkling.
What about those boys looking over the wall ! .' . . He
had expostulated with the Committee for admitting an
unpleasant work of fiction into their list — a solecism at
worst. He was thinking of Phillis's morals whilst Mary
starved ! He knew now what Mrs. Marrable had meant.

That harridan in the right !

Dying of neglect and worse ! His hand stole towards
the open front of the child's nightgown. With sudden
resolve he turned her body quite round on his knee, and
pushed the garment down to her middle.

Yes, the scars that play such an important part in the
evidence when these sort of cases come before the court
were all there, fresh and old scars ; deep and superficial ;
healed, ill-healed, and suppurating. He turned the body
round again, and felt Mary's pulse. It seemed to him
to be almost non-existent. . . .

Another long ten minutes — savage, agonizing, inter-
minable 1 ... He knew nothing about it . . . but he
wished the doctor would come ! The nurse had probably
not been able to catch him before he saw Phillis, and
had had to wait to waylay him until his official visit
was over.

And as the child lay across his knee, to all appearances
comatose, something grey and loathsome did crawl out
from the screwed black hair on to the forehead. . . . He
pulled out his handkerchief from his breast coat pocket,
he felt no sense of disgust to weaken his efficiency. . . .
Such things are ! ... It was all part of the horror that
had surely now culminated and left him seared and
stunned, shamed and blighted. . . .
The child sighed, and with a pathetic hint of the baby



Digitized by



Google



302 TALES OF THE UNEASY

ways that had been scorched and made to perish out
of her, crept closer into his embrace. Her sigh may have
been one of relief, Ensor fondly hoped it. . . .

The bluebottle buzzed, the black-beetle looked out
again from the crinkled folds of the Daily Telegraph
which Ensor had flung down. ... He did not move,
he hardly thought, he was conscious only of the child
nestling in his arms as if he were its new-found father,
and a peace was his, a peace he had never known, as if
his soul had at last found its billet. . . .

When Nurse Ferrier came up at last with the doctor,
he smiled.

" Do what you can for her, Doctor," he said pleadingly.

"Why wasn't I called before?" Hodgson began
angrily. Nurse Ferrier touched his arm. Ensor saw it-

The doctor imperiously pulled the duster out of the
window-hole to make more light for himself, and return-
ing, laid the child down on the wretched pallet and
methodically examined her. The examination over, he
gently pulled the shawl into position so as to cover her,
and rose from his knees.

"Mr. Ensor, I must see Mrs. Ensor about this," he
said gravely.

On the way down the narrow flight of stairs Ensor
summoned breath to ask a question.

"Is she dying?"

"Probably," was the doctor's curt reply, and it was
all he would vouchsafe.

Adelaide was in the hall and came to meet theirt.

"Where have you been, Doctor?" she asked sus-
piciously. Her eyes fell and rested scornfully on her
husband. . . .

" Wald, you look pretty bad. Go and get yourself a
whiskey and soda."



Digitized by



Google



THE TIGER-SKIN 303

"Yes, do," said Hodgson. He turned to Adelaide,
with a rough dignity of manner. "Mrs. Ensor, it is my
duty to tell you both that if that child upstairs dies I shall
refuse a certificate and order an inquest."

Wald almost admired Adelaide now for her pluck. A
spasm of annoyance, no more, crossed her face, and
turning, she led the way across the hall towards her
morning-room. She said over her shoulder —

"She's only shamming. It seems to me you want a
drink too, Doctor. That was thunder we heard just
now. It's upset you both. Wald, be good enough to
send Nurse Ferrier straight to me here. I'm going to
sack her."

She went into the portion of the hall that was screened
off, and seeing that both the men disregarded her gesture
of invitation to go further and stayed in the main hall,
she shrugged her shoulders and flung herself on to
her tiger-skin, turning her back, motionless.

The doctor looked at Ensor, and spoke meditatively.

"In Mrs. Ensor's present state 1 . . ." he murmured.
"Perhaps I had better speak to you, Mr. Ensor? . . ."

"Certainly," Ensor said, leading the way into the
dining-room. "I may say before you speak that I know
nothing of this. But that's no matter," he went on, "the
blame is mine."

He rang the bell. " Ask Gertrude to come to me here,"
he said to a maid who appeared at the service door at
the end.

The girl hesitated. She had something in her
hand. • . .

" What is it ? What is it ? " Ensor asked testily.

" I was going to show the doctor, Sir, what Mary had
to eat."

She held out a plate for their inspection with some
toast rinds and the remains of dripping fat adhering to



Digitized by



Google



304 TALES OF THE UNEASY

the sides. ... In her other hand she held a mug, into
which Dr. Hodgson peered.

"H'm, a concoction of tea-leaves. . . ."

41 She was fed, Sir, worse than the dog," the girl con-
tinued volubly. "Biscuits was bought for him. She
never complained, not she — too frightened for that, for
if she did she got the stick "

" Who beat her ? " Ensor asked, furiously.

"Mrs. Ensor, till she got ill. She used to take the
poker to her. There's all the marks on her back now —
you've seen 'em, Doctor?"

"Yes, yes. Hold your tongue now," Hodgson said.

He turned to Ensor who stood quietly beside him,
receiving the unbearable douche of the servant-girl's
revelations with such fortitude as he was able to muster.
" If the child dies there will have to be an inquest. I
must give the nurse some directions. Where is she?
Be off, back to your work ! " he bade the kitchen-maid,
"and ask Nurse to come to me."

Nurse Ferrier, quiet, composed, unsmiling, appeared
in the doorway, and Ensor scrutinized her face for news
as eagerly as if he had not possessed the gift of speech.

" Is she dead ? " he at last breathed.

"No, Sir, no," she answered kindly after a pause,
recalled, as it were, from other thoughts. Ensor did not
catch the almost imperceptible shake of the doctor's head
that came hard upon her words. The nurse continued,
softly, appealing to her chief. "We won't let her die,
will we, Doctor ! "

"Not if we can help it," he replied gruffly. "Get
yourself a drink, Mr. Ensor, and buck up now ! There
will be a lot to do presently."

Ensor slowly walked away and the doctor turned to
the nurse.



Digitized by LiOO? IC [



THE TIGER-SKIN 305

"I wouldn't give a farthing for that child's life, you
know," he said. " Have you brought her down ? "

"Yes, she's in the spare bedroom. Mr. Ensor would
wish her to have the best of everything, ... I
think? . . ."

Her long drooping eyes were raised to the doctor's
for a moment. She wanted to talk to him, and he knew
it. But he did not, at this juncture, care to throw any
deductions he might have made from facts patent to both
of them, into the common fund, and he interposed the.
chill of professional etiquette between himself and her
possible confidences.

He walked quickly, meditating the while, down the
narrow flagged way that led from the house door to the
gate in the wall, where his horse was being held for him
by James, the half idiotic manservant; the only male
creature, excepting her husband, whom Adelaide would
tolerate about the place. To-day, however, expecting as
usual to have the whole of the path to himself, the
doctor almost hustled a person of quite a different
type from James's, a smart, slight, efficient young fellow
slipping briskly up to the house. Hodgson apolo-
gized. The stranger, who was dressed in some sort of
uniform, looked curiously at him, as if about to speak,
but thought better of it and passed on.

After some little delay, Gertrude came to her master
in the dining-room where he had summoned her. She
looked hurried, portentous, but at the same time, armed
with the indifference of fat people. Her wide apron was
covered here and there with spots of gravy or blood ; he
supposed she had been "drawing" chickens or killing
them. Her bib was pinned up at the corners over her
ample bosom. She had no right to have a breast; she
x



Digitized by



Google



306 TALES OF THE UNEASY

had no right to be made like a woman. He loathed her,
the agent of Adelaide's system, the janissary who with
fiendish personal lust of cruelty had brutally carried out
his poor wife's unholy theories.

And all the while, the uncomfortable consciousness was
his, that whatever his contempt of Gertrude, it was
equalled by her scorn of him. This abominable woman
looked down on him ; in her eyes lurked the conception of
him as something mean and pitiful and likable, yes, she
awarded him a certain amount of good-humoured com-
miseration. And she was his cook !

"I couldn't come before," she said sturdily. "I've been
up with Phillis, who's left all alone because of this
business. Be done as soon as you can, Sir, for I want
to get back to the poor child."

"You will tell me before you go, please, how long this
has been going on ? How long have you been neglect-
ing and ill-treating your own child ? "

The woman sneered.

"Mary, d'ye mean? Well, you see, Mary all along
was only allowed to be here, as you might say, through
the kindness of Miss Adelaide, as being her cook's child."
She continued, as if repeating a lesson learned by heart,
"Miss Adelaide — Mrs. Ensor — has always been very
good to me and I've been the same to her. But it stands
to reason that Mrs. Ensor wasn't going to bring up my
bastard like a lady. Mary Adelaide— that's her name-
had to be trained to be a servant and work for her bread,
like her mother's always done, and when she didn't work,
she had to be beat."

" And what was the work you set a child of ten to do ? "
Ensor asked, striving at calmness.

"Child of ten— she's fifteen, same as Phillis! Well,
let me see, she cleaned the silver, setting down to it every



Digitized by



Google



THE TIGER-SKIN 307

day, and swept a room, or may be two, and did down the
steps, and her own sewing and mending."

" And what did she have to eat ? "

•'What the girl showed you . . ." Gertrude said,
throwing up her chin in sullen pride of evil-doing.
" Scraps what was left over from the day before. That is,
if I would remember to give it her, and she never re-
minded me. Too soft, shameful lazy she was, too, and
one had to take a stick or a poker to her to make her
bustle. Whoap ! Go 'long I was all the kind words she
got. And a neat cut across her back. She was that lazy
they never had time to heal before there was a new stripe
laid over the last one."

" My God ! A young child ! " He covered his face
with his hands.

Gertrude regarded him. Some shifting of values took
place in her heavy brain. She came a step nearer, and
her voice lost its tone of coarse bravado.

"You must know, Sir, I had my orders? "

" Your orders, woman ! Your orders to play the
murderess! You, the unnatural mother "

"You may look a little nearer home for the unnatural-
ness, if you will have it ? Some folks is very blind, and
deaf, too."

" What do you mean ? "

His tone was violent. The cook said, patiently,
raising her apron to her face —

" I'll say no more, Sir. I must be going-



"Stop I " cried Ensor furiously. "You brute "

"Call me brute, Sir!" Gertrude answered, almost
modestly. ...

Then her temper rose, she flushed.

"Do you know who's awaiting for me in my back
kitchen where I told him to stop ? " she said passion-
x 2



Digitized by



Google



308 TALES OF THE UNEASY

ately. "No one won't go away from here, Mister, I
said, so long as I give you my word. But I'd some-
thing I'd like to say to Mr. Ensor first before he saw
him, I said, and it would be best for all parties if I could
get it said. So he let me come, though he's not a-going
back without seeing you ! "

She produced a dirty card, from the bosom of her
dress, and handed it to her master. . . .

• ••••••

The nurse met the doctor on the doorstep when he
came back half an hour later. Her manner was instruc-
tive as she came forward, her finger on her lip, and he
knew what she would tell him.

"Mary's gone, Doctor. Half an hour ago. And
Mrs. Ensor has bolted herself into her bedroom, and
won't answer to any one. I'm afraid she's bad. And "
— she dropped her voice — "there's a man shut in the
library with Mr. Ensor. Here's what he brought. I
found it on the floor of the dining-room just now."

She produced the card, stained with blood where
Gertrude's fingers had grasped it. "Only fowl's ! " she
said apologetically. The doctor took it.

"The Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to
Children. Inspector G. W. Kelson ! " he exclaimed.
"That's Mrs. Marrable ! She said she was going to
put the Society on to them."

"She's a bit late," the nurse said.

"By half an hour," he echoed her, as they went in
together.

"You never heard anything like it," the nurse con-
tinued, as they proceeded upstairs; "Gertrude, the cook -
here has been telling me. And who she is and all.
They've just killed her — by inches."

"Not by inches, by yards," corrected Dr. Hodgson.



Digitized by



Google



THE TIGER-SKIN _ 309

He was very indignant. "The child's back is covered
with unhealed sores — suppurating. She doesn't weigh
more than forty-eight pounds. Sixty-two she should
have. Systematic neglect and outrageous cruelty!
They'll have to answer for it."

"Mr. Ensor knew nothing of it, I'll swear," the nurse
said quickly.

"Yes. His wife leads him by the nose," replied
Hodgson.

"She's a caution!" exclaimed the nurse, with
virulence.

"And she'll get off, because of her condition. They
always admit that."

"When it's her own child, Doctor? Of course you
know it's her own child ? "

"I suspected it," he said quietly.

They had come into the great, wide, lightly-papered,
spare bedroom, with three tall windows looking out over
the grey gravel sweep in front of the house. The
windows were wide open. The gardener could be heard
sharpening his old-fashioned instrument ready for cut-
ting the scrap of lawn beyond the gravel. Profession-
ally, perfunctorily, the doctor looked at and examined
what lay on the bed. Then, while the nurse finished
her work, he strolled to a window and stared out, wait-
ing to see the master of the house, whose voice could
be heard urgently talking in the room immediately
below.

The nurse, dabbling sponges m hot water, going
backwards and forwards with towels, talked. She had
not talked for weeks.

"The likeness ! " she said. "Don't you see it strong
now she's dead, Doctor? I must say I noticed it the
very first moment he came up into that garret where they"



Digitized by



Google



io TALES OF THE UNEASY

had put the poor child away to sleep — or to die, as it
happened. Nobody'd been near her for days. Gertrude
thought Mrs. Ensor had, and she thought — God knows
what she thought!" She shuddered. "There wasn't
so much as a jug of water there. Mrs. Ensor hoped
Mary would die, and Gertrude didn't care. She's a
regular bad one. She was cook to Mrs. Ensor before
she married and had a baby there, and Miss Adelaide's
father, he was a doctor, and he gave her a certificate of
death. He was a wicked old man, by all accounts. So
when Miss Adelaide got into trouble, this woman helped
her. . . ."

All the while she talked, she was busying herself about
the wretched little body of Mary. The doctor stood at
his post near the window, waiting for Mr. Ensor's visitor
to go, listening to the nurse's talk as he lightly slashed
his top-boots with his riding-whip, and decided what
he would do. He liked Ensor, and wanted to make it
easy for him.

"And," Nurse Ferrier continued, "she says they
bought this house with its high walls all round, because
Miss Adelaide didn't care to be seen about much. She
was ashamed, not so much because she had had a baby
without being married, but because it was such a
wretched little specimen. She called herself Mrs.
Dibben — that was the name of Gertrude's man — he was
a prize-fighter. I make out that he was in prison at
the time. Any way, he was never seen again. ... . .

Gertrude says they were all going on quite quietly, and
the two children brought up like sisters. . . . Mrs.

Ensor had almost come to think, Gertrude says, that it
was the other way about, and that the beautiful child
was hers, and the wretched one the cook's. . . . Gertrude

didn't care — her child was the gainer. . . . But that the



Digitized by



Google



THE TIGER-SKIN 311

day Mr. Ensor came, Mrs. Ensor rushed into the kitchen
like a mad thing, and said she'd told him Phillis was
hers and Mary Gertrude's, and that was the way it had
to be, for he was coming to live here. Doctor, what
do you think of that ? "

" I think, if it's true, it's a disgusting business. But
I don't quite believe it."

"I do," said the nurse stoutly. "I am coming to
believe it. That woman — Mrs. Ensor — is bad enough
for anything and she simply couldn't have had a
nice simple child like Phillis, not if she tried ever
so!"

"There, he's gone!" said Hodgson, leaving the
window. He came to the bedside and surveyed the
child's small body lying straight, neatly, fairly disposed.
The nurse stood proudly away from her work —

"She looks nice, now, doesn't she, Doctor? I've put
her on one of Miss Phillis's smart nightgowns. Gertrude
went in to Mrs. Ensor's room and got it for me. She's
not so bad, you know, Gertrude ; she only did as she was
told. Mrs. Ensor did the beating and wouldn't let her
—positively wouldn't let her give the child nourishing
food."

" How is Mrs. Ensor ? Did you gather ? "
"Quite calm, Gertrude says, though she knows every-
thing."

"She's absolutely determined not to let herself have
a miscarriage, that's about it," said Hodgson, buttoning
his coat. "She's got plenty of self-control and courage
of a kind."

"Courage— to be cruel ! " exclaimed the nurse, glanc-
ing at the human piece of wreckage on the bed. "And
I should say that if she thinks it necessary to starve
her children to death if they happen to be born weak-



Digitized by



Google



312 TALES OF THE UNEASY

lings, that the chances are she'll have to kill the next
too, even if she does manage to get it born all right,
and I have my doubts about that. She's far too keen
about it, too "

"What's that?" Hodgson interrupted, cocking his
ear.

"Mrs. Ensor's door ! "

" He's gone in to her, then ! "

They looked at each other.

• ••••••

Ensor, speaking urgently to his wife at the closed
door of her room, anxious to impart some intelligence
he had just received, could get no reply from her. He
did not give it up, but continued to call her by her name
— Adelaide. She had a pet name, chosen by herself.
He remembered it, but he could not bring himself to
use it.

Half an hour seemed to elapse. He heard a groan.

Though he hated her, it frightened him, for there was
no one with her. He changed the tenor of his appeals.

"Adelaide, if you are ill, you must not shut yourself
up like this. You may do harm to yourself — and to the
child. If you won't see me, at least let me send Gertrude
to you."

Then she spoke.

"Wald, I am not very ill — not more ill than I expect
to be. For I am going to have a child. It will not be
quite yet. As soon as it is born, I shall kill myself, but
not till then. So you need not be afraid."

Her voice sounded fainter,- she had turned away from
the door. He was astonished at her self-control — "not
more ill than I expect to be ! " He felt that he ought
to see for himself how she was. Bitterly, dispassion-
ately, he made the attempt.



Digitized by



Google



THE TIGER-SKIN 313

"Let me see you, then," he said gently. "Just for
one moment ! "

" Is it to scold me ? " Her voice sounded close to the
door. " I am not to be scolded — now."

The key was turned in the lock, and he made his way
in. His wife stood there on the threshold, half defiant,
half apologetic. As he knew Adelaide, the deprecation
was much for her. Her beautiful mournful eyes sought
his. They held no cryel gleams, such as had lurked
there so lately, when they had talked of Mary. Her dull
black silk peignoir was gathered round her ; she held it
looped pathetically in one thin hand. Yet he was not
moved. He only thought of her health, pathologically,
as a doctor might. It was his duty. He had neglected
his other duty lately.

She put up her sharp chin. Her hand let slip the
folds of black, they fell all round her, trailing. . . .

"Kiss me, Wald ! " she said.

"No, I cannot."

She turned, and moved towards the sofa that stretched
across the foot of her bed. Her stumble over the long
embarrassing folds of the garment she wore was a mute
reproach, but it could not affect him, to the extent of
inducing him to comply with her request. . . . She
breathed heavily and sat down on the sofa. . . .

"See Gertrude, then. She will tell you all you want
to know."

"Your cook! Adelaide, tell me yourself. Oh,
why ?"

She rocked backwards and forwards and nursed her
knees.

"I could not bear the sight of her, I tell you ! " she
answered him passionately. "She was a degenerate.
She disgraced me. She wasn't fit to live, she ought



Digitized by



Google



,14 TALES OF THE UNEASY

never to have been born — never even have been con-
ceived! But she shames her father, not me ! ... I
am a normal healthy woman and all disease is repugnant
to me. It's a law — a law that was infringed. . . . She
pays the penalty. . . . And to see her going about day
by day, the living testimony of unfitness — of beastli-
ness. . . . Why, the sight of her peaked, suffering face,
old and yellow — she looked like that even in her cradle
— from the very first moment that Gertrude showed her
to me — that finished me ! For I insisted on seeing her
at once, I was fit enough, I was about in a week. . . .
Then when I came to look closer — her awful hand — did
you know that she had a finger less on her right hand ?
. . . Still, I nursed her myself, I — faugh ! "

She put her handkerchief to her bitten lips — there was
blood on it when she took it away.

"Then when you came — I saw you look at her, in the
car, and again, when we got out, and you carried the
rugs for her as we walked up the drive — that was
enough ! I made up my mind then, and I hive never
repented it. Never, never, I tell you. You would never
have married me, if you had known, for you have the
same ideas as me. Wald, that's what I liked in you,
only I didn't know that you were a coward — a mean,
canting, respectable, conventional coward — what they
used to call lily-livered — or is it pigeon-livered ? "

"Sneer at me if you like, Adelaide, but explain.
Damn you, explain ! " he cried, forgetting himself, for-
getting her state, forgetting everything under the stress
of the terrible, nearly formulated Horror.

"What's there to explain?" she said. "I hated the
child, and I beat her. I beat her to death, that's all I "

He groaned in helplessness, overcome by her fierce
self-sufficiency.



Digitized by



Google



THE TIGER-SKIN 315

"But had you no sort of human feeling, no woman's
tenderness ? You've been a mother — there's surely such
a thing as a mother's heart . . . ? "

Adelaide looked at him wearily, shuddering. . . .

"Been a mother — yes. And you? — what about your
tenderness — your heart ? We used to wonder that your
heart didn't tell you when you heard her calling out —
screaming — yelling? I beat her, I tell you, I beat her
within an inch of her life, filthy, hateful object that I'd
brought into the world — through you ! Pah ! "

She flung herself down. Her tone was so piercing,
so foreign, so unknown to him, who had learned to
expect every variation in Adelaide, that he cried, in panic
fear merely —

"For God's sake, keep your head, Adelaide I Don't
go mad now, on top of it all ! "

"Oh, I'm not mad, not a bit of it, can't you see, you
fool? But, no, you can't see, you can't see anything,
unless it's under, your nose. It was under your nose,
and you worried and worried, and yet you didn't see
it ! Here you are — Mary's your own child — and mine !
Mine ! Yours ! Don't you remember that night — that
night after ' Tristan ' ? "

"No, I remember nothing. Be quiet, now!" He
held up his hand, as if to ward off a blow. "Where is
she?"

"My God, /don't know."

She fell back. Her pains had begun. He took no
notice.

"I'm going to Mary," he murmured.

She rushed forward, and bolted the door behind him.

The doctor and the nurse were still waiting by the
body of Mary. Aware of the portentous visit of In-



Digitized by



Google



316 TALES OF THE UNEASY

spector Kelson, Hodgson fancied he might be of some use.
He might do Ensor a good turn in allocating much
of the blame, which the husband was so generously-
anxious to take on his own shoulders, on to the wife's,
where it belonged. There were reasons why she should
be better able to bear it than he, the law would be merci-
ful to her in her then condition.

Hodgson could not fathom her. He was merely an
overworked, overdriven country doctor, riding about
daily from one case to another. That the maladies of
the hardy, normal, if worn-out wives of the labouring
classes were of a painful and dreary similarity, and com-
pletely relieved him of the necessity of keeping himself
up to date with the new departures in medicine, was
perhaps the reason that be did not break down from
obvious overwork. His old mare who carried her sleep-
ing master on her back along the same old roads to the
same old cottages to attend to Hodge's same wife's
seventh baby was as well preserved as he.

A complicated, abnormal case like Mrs. Ensor's;
circumstances so dramatic as this affair at High Walls
seldom or never came his way. And events in this house
had in the last twenty-four hours succeeded each other
with such a bewildering rapidity that he felt himself
excused from keeping up too rigid an attitude with the
nurse, who, like himself, was humanly and profession-
ally interested, and he permitted himself a certain
relaxation in talking to her.

Nurse Ferrier, on the other hand, having been shut
up in High Walls for many days under the rigorous
rule of Adelaide, was enjoying herself thoroughly. All
the while that Ensor was closeted with Mrs. Ensor she
continued freely to develop her physiological views, leav-
ing the room, only for a moment, to get some white



Digitized by



Google



THE TIGER-SKIN 317

flowers to lay upon the child's breast. They heard
voices from the next room, and her open, and his pro-
fessionally concealed, curiosity was wrought up to the
highest pitch when suddenly these voices ceased, and
they heard the click of a latch and a step in the
corridor. . . .

Then the door of the room they were in was opened
with deliberation and the hero of their surmises and of
their sympathy walked into the room.

He did not really seem to see them, as they observed
afterwards, although he moved his head slightly as he
passed the doctor and made what might pass as a grunt
of recognition. His politeness survived in the overthrow
of all his standards and hopes and ambitions. They
stood humbly aside; it was his hour. No one, so far
as they knew, had told him that Mary was dead, but
he could not help knowing it when his eyes had rested
for a moment on what lay on the bed.

At a sign from Hodgson, the nurse left the room.
The doctor followed her. The two stood in the corridor
outside, looking nervously, now at that door of the room
they had just vacated, now at that which gave admit-
tance to Mrs. Ensor's apartments, whence came no sound
of stirring.

Five minutes later, Wald Ensor came out of the bed-
room, carrying the body of the child in his arms very
carefully. As he passed his wife's door, with his
burden, it was opened sharply and as suddenly closed
again. Mrs. Ensor had looked out.

Hodgson and Ferrier followed Ensor downstairs, won-
dering what he was going to do, afraid that he had gone
suddenly mad and that they would have to interfere.

But so far he was perfectly quiet, restrained, and
measured in his movements. He walked steadily,



Digitized by



Google



318 TALES OF THE UNEASY

balancing what he carried as a nurse does a baby, down
into the hall, where the autumn fire leaped on the hearth,
and the charred logs tinkled as they fell. He went
through it into the portion railed off with screens and
arm-chairs, and, stooping, deposited the corpse of his
child on the tiger-skin which lay spread over the sofa—
the old yellow sofa from Portland Place. The creases
were in the skin that his wife had made when she was
lying there only yesterday. Her bag — one of her bags
— lay on it, and with a violent gesture of his occupied
hand, Ensor swept it off.

Then, deliberately, as if he were in church, he knelt
down beside the little white-robed form, smoothed the
folds of the nightgown his hands had disarrayed, and
half raising her, taking her in his arms, covered her with
kisses long and deep.

He did not lift his head when Gertrude, her apron
cast aside, a puzzling figure with her unaccustomed
black surfaces displayed, pushed open the red baize
door, and stood, savagely poised, her bony, floury arms
resting on her hips. . . .

" Go back ! " the doctor said, in a loud whisper.

Gertrude paid no heed. Her dull faithful eyes were
raised, fixed on something she saw at the head of the
staircase. It was her mistress who was even -now
descending. The nurse darted forward, and in so doing
her dress caught in an accidental nail in one of the
screens and made it fall over the end of the couch. Wald
Ensor looked up, he kept hold of the child's hand. . . .
Adelaide continued to descend. Gertrude went a step
to meet her, but Adelaide waved her away. ...

Then Ensor rose, for Adelaide had reached the bottom
of the staircase and was coming to him, and Mary. . . .,
She tottered, but she came on. . . .



Digitized by



Google



THE TIGER-SKIN 319

Her husband raised his finger and pointed it at her,
and she ceased, trembling, to advance. . . . Gertrude
strode up to her and held her shoulder. Her state was
obvious — she no longer took pains to conceal it.

"Listen, all of you ! " Ensor was saying, in the same
-gloomy, intent voice he had used all day. "I pray to
r Almighty God that this woman may never live to bear
another child ! "

• ••••••

He stayed for the inquiry into the death of Mary;
he bore himself like a man. Then he left England, and
his wife never saw him again. She survived the birth
of her child, stillborn.



THE END



Digitized by



Google



S50



Richard Clay and Sons, Limited

.br rad street hill, e.c, and

bungay, suffolk.



35



Digitized by



Google



Digitized by



Google







'III llll I






b890C50^0688a



Digitized by



Good



Digitized by



Google



A^OaSOMQbflfl




b89005(H0688a



Digitized by CjOOQlC





led by LiOO?
