Before passing on to a slight and general account of
Andr^ Gide himself as a man of letters, I must first give the
readers of this translation a few words of introduction to
Strait is the Gate, This short book (I^ l?orte itroite) is perhaps
more universally admired than any of his other works and
possesses many of Gide’s most striking characteristics. It has
a lucid clarity, a simplicity, a directness, a beauty and sweet-
ness of thought, and a musical expression which he has
rarely equalled; here he almost attains what he often declared
should be thfc chief, though no doubt unattainable, quality
of every artist ~ that of *hanalisation* . All in this book is
equally ordinary and extraordinary. There are only three
principal characters, the minor ones being mere slight,
though vivid, sketches; there is very little scenery; the
story takes place mainly in the grey severity of a Normandy
coimtry house (a picture of Gide’s own home), and secondly
in the sun-bathed country of Provence, rich with fruits and
classical associations, which was his father’s native land -
those two contrasting origins from which Gide drew the
mingled benefits of his double heredity. One might almost
say there are no events in this story, no dramatic scenes ;
all flows on gently and normally as in the everyday life of a
country gentleman’s family. And yet, just below the te-
fiice, we constantly feel the secret tremor of relentlessly
approaching fiite - the menace of the exquisite Alissa’s
sublime virtue, the menace of Jerome’s virtuous sub-
missiveness. Between these two united contrasts three
young creatures, ripe for love and happiness, are submerged
in gloomy despair. We ask ourselves as we read, ‘What
▼ii



then is right? What is wrong?* But does not the question
itself imply its answer?

It would seem, however, that the importance of Andre
Gide in the contemporary history of French literature has
not been sufficiently realized by the English reading public.
He died in 195 1 at the age of 82, and for more than sixty
years had worked as a writer with unfaltering energy and
inexhaustible fertility. And yet his almost sensational repu-
tation in France began really to percolate into England only
when the four great volumes of Gide*s Journal in Mr Justin
O’Brien’s admirable translation finally opened the eyes of
English-speaking people to Gide’s astounding qualities.
There are, in fact, many reasons for this. The very extent
and diversity of these qualities make them hard for more
ordinary mortals to grasp. And it is tnie that in France
itself many of his works were literary battlefields. In
England publishers were for the most part more wary, and
for many years refused to accept translations of some of
Gide’s most famous works. The translation of Les Nomri^,
tures terrestres did not appear in English till 1947, some
twenty years after it had become a best seller in almost
every country in the world. Two other of his books almost
equally famous, Ulmmoraliste and hes Caves du Vatican,
though already translated, are stiU unprocurable in English
and in England. In England, too, Gide was outshone by
two famous rivals - Marcel Proust and Francois Mauriac.
The prudishness of English taste, which is sometimes
alleged as the reason for Gide’s want of success in England,
did not, curiously enough, affect the English admiration
for either of these two, though Proust’s reputation in pri-
vate life was exactly the same as Gide’s and he was almost
equally courageous in admitting it in his books. As for
Mauriac, in spite of, or perhaps because of, his orthodox
beliefs, no one has ever portrayed vice and crime with
greater zest than he.

But great as are the merits of Proust and, in a lesser
viii



degree, of Mauriac, neither of them has been considered by
French authorities as a master of style. They are necessarily
therefore easier to translate, to understand, and to appre-
ciate than Gide, But if readers are being asked here to con-
sider one of those masterpieces which brought him his
celebrity, it must be that Gide has other qualities which are
able to overcome the obstacles imposed by the veil of a
foreign tongue and the hostility inspired by unorthodox
beliefs. These qualities are so diverse, so numerous, so
contradictory even, that readers should remember while
reading La Porfe itroite that it is astonishingly unlike
Ulmmoraliste which preceded it and which, in its turn, was
the converse of the view of life presented by its predecessor
Les Noumtures terrestres.

‘Even if it leads to honour and glory,’ writes Gide in
Si k grain ne meurt^ ‘I detest following a road already laid out.
I like chance, adventure, the unknown; I like not to be
where I am expected to be - for it allows me to be where I
please and to be left in peace there. What I prize above all
other things is to be able to think in freedom.’

rWhen he was nearing his fiftieth year, Gide wrote an
autobiographical memoir, giving an account of his spiritual,
mental, ^ind physical development - Si le grain ne meurt
(If it Die). It begins with his earliest recollections and ends
with his mother’s death and his betrothal to his cousin in
1895. The first part of the book tells of his Protestant up-
bringing as an only and fatherless child, by two devoted
women, whose chief idea was to keep him from the know-
ledge of evil. His love of reading, of poetry, and of music
began very early, and all his life music was one of his pro-
foundest studies and delights. He learnt the piano when he
was very young, and, when he was older, his distinguished
music-master implored his mother to allow him to become
a professional. This was not to be, but till almost the end of
his life he would practise the piano with extreme diligence
for many hours a day, though he never consented to play



to an audience. But tliis long and learned study of musical
composition must no doubt have influenced, or at any rate 
been deeply related to, his qualities as a prose writer.

His first book, Lgs CahUrs d^Andri Waiter^ was pub-
lished in 1891. He was astonished at first that it had no suc-
cess. It is, he tells us, a declaration of his love for his cousin
(which it is diflicult to distinguish from his love of God),
together with a great deal of religion, music, metaphysics,
and poetry thrown in; it ends by Andr^ Walter’s going
mad and committing suicide. Not so Andr^ Gide. He had
other work apd other interests. At that early age he had
already entered Mallarm^’s circle in company with other
talented young men, of whom the most gifted and finally
the most illustrious was Paul Val6ry - Gide’s life-long
friend ’ Gide is one of the many who have left an account of
those famous Tuesday evenings when MaUarm^’s disciples
gathered round the table in the little dining-room to listen
to their master’s Divagations, This was the age of symbolism.
Gide himself was caught in its meshes and perhaps never
entirely escaped from them. Among his earliest works two
short essays - the TraitS du Nardsse and La Tentative
amourem are devoted to explaining and illustrating some
of this school’s doctrines. His famous and beautiful Rjetour
de Tenfant prodigae, Le Voyage d^Urien, the tragedy of Saul,
and much later two short but important works suggested
by Greek mythology, Oedipus and Theseus y are examples of the
enduring influence which symbolism exercised over his mind.

But in 1895 Gide had his first great experience of travel
and became aware of the overwhelming importance travel
was to have in the development of his life and art. He left
for Tunis with a single friend and comrade, Paul Laurens,
and recalls in Si k grain ne meurt that he started on this
journey with the determination to gain for himself ex-
perience of life and liberty of thought, to wean himself
from the teaching of the Scriptures, to break through the
hard shell of his puritanical education and so allow the



inner grain of his soul and mind to ripen and ‘bring forth
much fruit*.

His meeting a year or two later with Oscar Wilde was no
doubt an important, though accidental, episode in his life,
recounted in a few startling pages in the second part of
If it Die, but it cannot be said that Wilde had any moral or
intellectual influence on Gide, though no doubt the
tragedy of the Englishman's situation greatly touched him.
No I the fruit that Gide brought back with him from his
travels in Africa is to be found in his famous book Les
Nourritures terrestres (Fruits of the Earth). But this book was
not published till 1897 and remained almost unnoticed, ex-
cept by a handful of ardent admirers, for another ten years.

During his first trip to North Africa he fell ill and on his
return to France was ordered by his doctor to spend some
months in Switzerland doing a solitary rest-cure. He occu-
pied his leisure in writing Pa/udes, the first of three humorous
and ironical satires, which he called Soties. * For it must not
be forgetten that in spite of his earnestness, his intensity, his
realization of the tragic side of life, he had an indomitable
sense of humour. No one could be gayer than he in private
life, take more pleasure in games of all sorts, write witder
letters, and better appreciate the humour of others. But
during his solitary stay in Switzerland, on his return from
the charms and enlightenments of Tunis, he was seized by
a desire to ridicule the social life of Paris. There is nothing
realistic in this little book. His pictures of the emptiness of
life in Paris, of the incapacity for action of any sort, of
Hubert's philanthropy, and of the intellectual AugHe's salon
are full of absurdities which amount to grotesqueness. It is
almost tragedy, however, when the teller of this history is
nearly overcome by the seductions of Paludes as he con^
templates the bewitching iridescence which the over-
hanging sky sheds on these muddy swamps. How can he
escape?

* Satirical farce of the 14th and 15 th centuries,
xi



He escaped by another journey to North Africa, which
gave rise to Les Nourritures ferrestres, a book that had an
incalculable influence on the younger generations of the
early part of the twentieth century. In lyrical flights of the
loveliest prose Gide taught them to leave the swamps and
dullness of V abides^ ‘to walk with bare feet simply on the
common ground’, to enjoy all the wondrous gifts of life
and nature, to snjoy^ too, like Menalque, privation and re-
nunciation as well as or perhaps better than indulgence.
The violent attacks made upon Gide as a ‘corrupter of
youth’ are largely based upon a misinterpretation of this
book, which, though he enlarged it, he never repudiated.

In the next five or six years the most important of Gide’s
works were, in 1899, the VromHhk mal-enchatni^ another
^sotie\ full of fantasy and reflexions on human conduct, in
which appeared for the first time Gide’s celebrated ‘acte
gratuit’, the idea of which he took up again and developed
in hss Caves du Vatican, This book, which he calls a ^sotie*
too, is more elaborate, more fantastic, with more characters
and events in it than any other of the books he wrote before
The Coiners^ and in especial it has in it the enchanting
absurdities' of the youthful Lafcadio.

Then, in 1902, came LTmmraliste, the subject of which
is the converse, so to speak, of La Porte itroite. Both these
books are written in the first person, and both contain
psychological studies of extreme subtlety and passages of
great poetic beauty. Michel, Vimmoralistey encouraged by
the plausible teaching of the wealthy cosmopolitan
Menalque, indulges his own sensual personality, and re-
lentlessly causes his wife’s death. Alissa, on the other hand,
allured by what she believes to be the call of virtue and the
voice of God, breaks her beloved cousin’s heart and dies
alone in the throes of doubt and disillusionment. Many of
his readers have assumed, unjustifiably, that the author’s
portraits of these two contrasting characters show moral
approval of them both.

xii



In the meantime Gide’s reputation was rapidly in-
creasing.. Before the first quarter of the twentieth century
had gone by, in spite of his enemies - or perhaps because
of them - he was counted among the most important of
French writers. With a few intimate friends he founded
La Nomlh Revue Franfaise which, for more than twenty
years, was the most discerning and powerful of French
literary reviews. Among other short stories, rkits as he
called them, for he would not give them the name of novels,
the most pathetic, the most poetical, and the most per-
plexing is ha Sjmphonie pastorale, the tale of the blind girl
and the Protestant pastor.

Here too must be mentioned a book printed privately
and anonymously in 1911 under the curious title C.RD,N.
It was not till 1924 that it appeared as Corjdon and was
signed by Andre Gide. An argumentative plea in favour of
homosexuality, it was based chiefly on a scientific study of
natural facts and is a defence of practices and liberties
which the author holds would contribute to man’s social
and moral progress. And it is no doubt true that the very
fact of thus braving a universal taboo increased the
possibility of discussing rationally one of the most im-
portant problems of modern civilization.

But his most ambitious work of fiction, which he
finished just before starting for the Congo in 1925, is hes
Faux-monnayeurs {The Coiners), This he called his ‘first
novel’, and in tins he no doubt attempted to change
fundamentally the modern conception of novel-writing.
The richness and complication of his ideas on this sub-
ject are to be found in Le Journal des faux-monnayeurs,
a special journal he kept while writing the novel and in
which he analyses the author’s reactions to the characters
he invents and their reciprocal reactions to him; in which
he discusses too his ideas on plot and envisages an ori-
ginal method of introducing, grouping, and dispersing his
characters.



He was a man of immense feading, though he would
always say that he read slowly. Besides, of course, his wide
knowledge of French literature, he knew many foreign
languages, especially German, Italian, and English. From his
earliest age and for many years, he was immersed morning,
noon, and night in the Scriptures. From this he went on to
the study of the German philosophers and later to
Nietzsche. And all his life he lived intimately with Goethe,
as poet and man. He had a passion too for English literature.
From Shakespeare to Donne, from Defoe to Keats, from
Blake to Browning, he delighted in English writers, in their
originality, their personalities, their difference from the
French classics. But perhaps of all foreign writers, the one
who stirred him most, as the explorer of undiscovered
depths in human psychology, was Dostoyevsky.

As a critic, too, Gide was incomparable. His criticisms
are to be found in contributions to reviews, in introductions
to new and old works, in innumerable passages of his
private journal, where he often discusses, not only the
various works of specific authors, but the fundamental
principles of the art of writing.

His voyage to the Congo did not result in a great work
of art, but it probably made him realize things from which
he had hitherto turned his eyes away. Miners in the coal-
pits, slaves in the French Congo, had left him more or less
indifferent; it was not till he saw them that he began to
think of them. Such thoughts awoke in him, as in many
others, interest and sympathy for the great Russian experi-
ment, and it was with a passionate desire to find here a
cause to which he could wholeheartedly devote himself
that he accepted an invitation to Moscow. But when he saw
this too with his own eyes he realized that what he re-
Hgiously believed in was freedom and independence of
thought. Here too he felt the revulsion that had made him
rebel against the Christian Church and the belief in dogma.
The two little books tcBing of his visit to and his return



from Russia show how completely he cut himself off from
Soviet communism.

During the war and the years of occupation, in spite of ill-
health, and with, as usual, the greatest generosity of time and
money, he devoted himself to helping refugees - principally
Germans. His chief companion and consoler in these years
was Virgil, whose Aeneid hardly ever left the pocket next
his heart.

The last work in the art he loved was a kind of Pindaric
ode in honour of his ideal hero - Theseus. Theseus, who
from youth onwards killed the monsters who preyed upon
his countrymen, and, in spite of tragic disasters, sometimes
brought on by his own follies, laid the foundations of the
glorious city of Athens.

DOROTHY BUSST


XT




CHAPTER ONE


Some people might have made a book out of it ; but
the story I am going to tell is one which took all my
strength to live and over which I spent all my virtue.
So I shall set down my recollections quite simply, and
if in places they are ragged I shall have recourse to no
invention, and neither patch nor connect them ; any
effort I might make to dress them up would take away
the last pleasure I hope to get in telling them.

I lost my father before I was twelve years* old. As
there was nothing to keep my mother at Le Havre,
where my father had had a practice as a doctor, she de-
cided to go to Paris where she thought I should be
better able to finish my education. She took a small
apartment near the Luxembourg and Miss Ashburton
came to live with us. Miss Flora Ashburton, who had
no relations of her own, had begun by being my
mother’s governess ; she afterwards became her com-
panion and later on her friend. I spent my childhood
in the society of these two women whom I remember
as equally gentle and equally sad, and always dressed
in mourning. One day - it was a good long time, I
think, after my father’s death - my mother changed the
black ribbon in her morning cap for a mauve one.

‘ Oh, mamma ! ’ I cried. ‘ That colour doesn’t suit you
at all.’ The next morning the black ribbon was back
again.

My health was delicate. My mother and Miss Ash-
burton had only one thought - to keep me from ailing.



If I have not become an idler as a result of their solici-
tude it must really be that my love of work is ingrained.
At the very beginning of the fine weather they both
used to persuade themselves that it was time for me to
leave town, that I was growing pale. About the middle
of June we would start for Fongueusemare, in the
neighbourhood of Le Havre, where we used to spend
the summer every year at my Uncle Bucolin’s.

Standing in a garden which is neither very large nor
very fine, and which has nothing special to distinguish
it from a number of other Normandy gardens, the Bu-
colins’ house, a white two-storied building, resembles
a great many country houses of the century before last.
A score of large windows look east on to the front of
the garden ; as many more on to the back ; there arc
none at the sides. The windows have small panes ; some
of them, which have been recently replaced, seem too
light in colour among the old ones, which look green
and duU beside them. Certain others have flaws in the
glass which our parents used to call ‘bubbles’; a tree
seen through them becomes distorted ; when the post-
man passes he suddenly develops a hump.

The garden is rectangular and is enclosed by a wall.
The part which lies in front of the house consists of a
fairly large, shady kwn with a gravel path all round it.
On this side the wall is lower and allows a view of the
farmyard and buildings which lie round the garden;
the farm is bordered, according to the custom of the
country, by an avenue of beeches.

Behind the house on the west side the garden spreads
more spaciously. A walk, gay with flowers, runs along
the south espalier wail and is protected from the sea
winds by a thick screen of Portugal laurel and a few



ttees. Anothet walk iimiiing along the north wall dis-
appears under a mass of branches. My cousins used to
call it the ‘dark walk^ and would not venture along it
after twilight. These two paths led to the kitchen-
garden, which continues the flower-garden on a lower
level, and which you reach by a small flight of steps.
Then, at the bottom of the kitchen-garden, a little gate
with a secret fastening leads, on the other side of the
wall, to a coppice in which the beech avenue terminates
right and left. As one stands on the door-step of the
west front one can look over the top of this clump of
trees to the plateau beyond with its admirable clothing
of crops. On the horizon, at no great distance, can be
seen the church of a little village and, when the air is
stfll, the smoke rising from half a dozen houses.

Every fine summer evening after dinner we used to
go down to the Tower garden’. We went out by the
little secret gate and walked as far as a bench in the
avenue from which there was a view over the country ;
there, near the thatched roof of a deserted marl-pit, my
uncle, my mother, and Miss Ashburton would sit
down ; before us the little valley filled with mist, and
over the distant woods we watched the sky turn golden.
Afterwards we would linger for a while at the lower
end of the garden where it had already grown dark.
When we came in we found my aunt in the drawing-
room. She hardly ever went out with us. For us chil-
dren the evening ended here ; but very often we were
still reading in our rooms when we heard our elders
go up to bed.

Almost every hour of the day which we did not
spend in the garden we spent in the ‘school-room’, my
uncle’s study, in which some school desks had been



placed for us. My cousin Robert and I worked side by
side - behind us were Juliette and Alissa. AHssa was
two years older than I, and Juliette one year younger ;
Robert was the youngest of us four.

I am not writing here an account of my early recol-
lections, but only of those which refer to my story. It
really begins, I may say, in the year of my father’s
death. Perhaps my sensibility - over-stimulated as it
had been by our bereavement and if not by my own
grief at any rate by the sight of my mother’s - predis-
posed me at this time to new emotions. I had matured
precociously, so that when we went to Fongueusemare
that year, Juliette and Robert seemed to me all the
younger by comparison, but when I saw Alissa I under-
stood on a sudden that we two had ceased to be
children.

Yes, it was certainly the year of my father’s death ;
my recollection is confirmed by a conversation which,
I remember, took place between my mother and Miss
Ashburton immediately after our arrival. I had come
unexpectedly into the room where my mother and her
friend were talking together; the subject of their talk
was my aunt. My mother was indignant that she had
not gone into mourning or had gone out again so soon.
(To tell the truth it was as impossible for me to imagine
Aunt Bucolin dressed in black as my mother in col-
ours.) The day of our arrival Lucile Bucolin, as far as
I can remember, was wearing a muslin gown. Miss
Ashburton, conciliatory as ever, was trying to calm
my mother.

‘After aU,’ she argued timidly, ‘white is mourning
too.’

‘And do you call that red shawl she has round her



shoulders mourning too? Flora, 1 am ashamed of you/
cried my mother.

It was only during the holidays that I saw my aunt
and no doubt the warm summer weather was the
reason of her wearing the transparent, low-necked
bodices in which I always remember her; but still
more than the brilliant colour of the scarves which
she used to throw over her bare shoulders, it was my
aunt’s low necks that shocked my mother.

Lucile Bucolin was very beautiful. I still have by me
a little portrait of her, in which I can see her as she
then was, looking so young that she might have been
taken for the elder sister of her daughters, sitting side-
ways in an attitude which was habitual to her, her head
leaning on her left hand, her little finger curved rather
affectedly towards her lip. A large-meshed net confines
the masses of her curly hair, which fall half-uncoiled
upon her neck. In the opening of her bodice a locket
of Italian mosaic hangs from a loosely tied black velvet
neck ribbon. Her black velvet sash, with its wide float-
ing bow, her broad-brimmed soft straw hat which is
dangling from the back of her chair - everything adds
to the childishness of her appearance. Her right hand
hangs by her side, holding a shut book.

Lucile Bucolin came from a West Indian family :
she had either never known her parents or lost them
very early. My mother told me later that when she was
left an orphan, or possibly even deserted, she was taken
in by Pasteur Vautier and his wife, who at that time
had no children of their own. They left Martinique
soon after, taking her with them to Le Havre, where
the Bucolins were settled. The Vautiers and the Bu-
colins used to see a good deal of each other. My uncle



was at that time employed in a bank abroad, and it was
only three years later, when he came home to stay with
his people, that he saw little Ludle. He fell in love with
her and at once asked her to marry him, to the great
grief of his parents and of my mother. Lucile was then
sixteen years old. In the meantime Madame Vautier
had had two children ; she was beginning to be anxious
as to the influence their adopted sister - whose cha-
racter was developing more and more oddly every
month - might have over them ; the household, more-
over, was in straitened circumstances. My mother told
me all this in order to explain why the Vautiers ac-
cepted her brother’s proposal so gladly. What I sup-
pose for my own part is, that Miss Lucile was becom-
ing terribly embarrassing. I am well enough acquainted
with Le Havre society to imagine the kind of reception
that a girl of such fascinations would meet with. Pas-
teur Vautier, whom I knew later on, was a gentle
creature, at once circumspect and ingenuous, incap-
able of coping with intrigue and quite defenceless
against evil - the worthy man must have been at the
end of his tether. I can say nothing of Madame Vau-
tier ; she died in giving birth to a fourth child who
was about my own age and who afterwards became
my friend.

Lucile Bucolin took very little share in our life ; she
did not come downstairs ftom her room till after the
mid-day meal was over, and then immediately stretched
herself on the sofa or in a hammock and remained
there till evening, when she would rise, no less languid
than before. She used sometimes to raise a handker-
chief to her forehead as if wiping away some imaginary
. €



moisture, though her skin was a perfection of smooth
purity ; this handkerchief of hers Med me with wonder
because of its iSneness and its scent, which seemed more
like the perfume of a fruit than of a flower ; sometimes
she would draw from her waist a minute mirror with
a sliding silver lid, which hung with various other
objects from her watch-chain; she would look at her-
self, wet her finger at her lips and then moisten the
corner of her eyes. She used often to hold a book, but
it was almost always shut ; a tortoise-shell bookmarker
was stuck between its pages. If you came near her she
did not turn from the contemplation of her dreams to
look at you. Often from her careless or tired hand,
from the back of the sofa or from a- fold of her dress,
her handkerchief would drop to the ground, or her
book, or a flower, maybe, or the bookmarker. One
day when I picked up her book - this is a childish
memory I am telling you - I blushed to see it was a
book of poetry.

In the evening after dinner Lucile Bucolin did not
join our family party at the table, but sat down to the
piano, where she took a kind of placid pleasure in play-
ing one or other of Chopin’s slow maaurkas ; some-
times she would break oflF in the middle of a bar and
pause, suspended motionless on a chord.

I used to experience a peculiar discomfort when I
was with my aunt ; it was a feeling of uneasiness, of
disturbance, mingled with a kind of admiration and a
kind of terror. Perhaps some obscure instinct set me
against her ; and then I felt that she despised Flora Ash-
burton and my mother, and that Miss Ashburton was
afraid of her, and that my mother disliked her.



Lucile Bucoiin, 1 wish 1 no longer bore you malice ;
I wish I could forget for a moment how much harm
you did ... at any rate, I will try to speak of you with-
out anger. *

One day of that summer - or perhaps of the follow-
ing, for as the place where the scene was laid never
changed, my memories sometimes overlap and become
confused - one day I went into the drawing room to
fetch a book ; she was there. I was on the point of going
away again when she called me back - she, who as a
rule never seemed to see me.

‘Why do you run away so fast, Jerome? Are you
afraid of me?’

With a beating heart I drew near, forced myself to
smile, put out my hand. She took my hand with one of
hers and with the other stroked my cheek. ‘How badly
your mother dresses you, you poor little thing!’ she
said.

At. that time I used to wear a sort of sailor
suit with a large collar, which my aunt began pulling
about.

‘ Sailor collars are worn much more open,’ said she,
undoing a button of my shirt. ‘ There, see if that doesn’t
look better!’ and taking out her little mirror, she drew
my face down to hers, passed her bare arm around my
neck, put her hand into my shirt, asked me laughingly
if I was ticklish - went on » further. ... I started so
violently that my shirt tore across and with a flaming
face I fled, as she called after me :

‘ Oh, the little stupid 1 ’

I rushed away to the other end of the kitchen-garden,
and there I dipped my handkerchief into a little tank.



put it to my forehead “ washed, scrubbed “ my cheeks,
my neck, every part of me the woman had touched.

There were certain days on which Lucile Bucolin
had one of her ‘attacks’. They would come on sud-
denly and the whole house was turned upside down.
Miss Ashburton made haste to get the children out of
the way and distract their attention ; but it was impos-
sible to stifle or to prevent their hearing the dreadful
screams which came from the bedroom or the drawing-
room. My uncle lost his head ; we heard him rushing
along the passages, fetching towels and eau de Cologne
and ether ; in the evening at table, where my aunt was
not yet able to appear, he looked anxious and aged.

When the attack was more or less over, Lucile Bu-
colin used to send for her children - that is for Robert
and Juliette - never for Alissa. On those melancholy
days Alissa would shut herself up in her room where
her father sometimes joined her, for he used often to
talk to Alissa.

My aunt’s attacks made a great impression upon the
servants. One evening when the attack had been par-
ticularly acute and I was being kept in my mother’s
room, where what was going on in the drawing-room
was less noticeable, we heard the cook running along
the passages calling out: ‘Sk, sir, come quick! My
poor lady is dying.’

My uncle had gone up to Aiissa’s room ; my mother
went out to meet him on his way down. A quarter of
an hour later I heard them talking below the windows
of the room where I had remained, and my mother’s
voice reached me.

‘Do you know what I think, my dear? The whole



thing is play-acting/ And she repeated the word several
times over, emphasising every syllable, ^play-acting.

This was towards the end of the holidays and two
years after our bereavement. I was not to see my aunt
much oftener. The unhappy event which shattered our
family life was preceded by a little incident which oc-
curred a short time before the final catastrophe and
turned the uncertain and complex feeKng I had hitherto
experienced for Lucile Bucolin into pure hatred. But
before relating this I must first speak of my cousin.

That Alissa Bucolin was pretty, I was incapable yet
of perceiving ; I was drawn and held to her by a charm
other than mere beauty. No doubt she was very like her
mother ; but the expression of her eyes was so different
that it was not till later that I became aware of this like-
ness. I cannot describe faces ; the features escape me
and even the colour of the eyes ; I can only recall the
expression of her smile - a smile that was already al-
most sad - and the line of her eyebrows, which were so
extraordinarily far from her eyes, raised above the eye
in a great circle. I have never seen any like them any-
where . . . stay, though I there is a Florentine statuette
of the time of Dante ; and I like to fancy that Beatrice
as a child had eyebrows wide-arched like her. They
gave her look, her whole being, an expression of en-
quiry which was at once anxious and confident - yes,
of passionate enquiry. She was all question and expec-
tation. You shall hear how this questioning took
possession of me, became my life.

And yet Juliette might have been considered more
beautiful ; the brilliancy of joy and health was upon
her ; but this beauty of hers beside her sisteFs grace

lO



seemed something external, something which lay open
to the whole world at the first glance. As for Robert,
there was nothing particular to distinguish him. He
was merely a boy of about my own age ; I used to play
with him and Juliette ; with Alissa I used to talk. She
mixed very little in our games ; as far back as I can re-
member, I see her serious, gently smiling, reflective.
What did we talk about? What can two children talk
about? I will try to tell you in a moment, but let me
first finish what I have to say about my aunt, so as to
have done with her.

Two years after my father’s death, my mother and I
spent the Easter holidays at Le Havre. We did not stay
with the Bucolins, who had comparatively little room
in their town house, but with an elder sister of my
mother’s, whose house was larger. Aunt Plantier,
whom I rarely had the opportunity of seeing, had long ^
since been left a widow ; I hardly knew her children, /
who were much older than I was and very unlike me.

The Plantiers’ house was not actually in the town^ *
but half way up the small hill called the ' C6te’, which
overlooks it. The Bucolins lived in the business
quarter ; a steep short cut led in a few minutes from
one house to the other. I used to run up and down it
several times a day.

On that particular day I had had lunch at my uncle’s.
After the meal was over he went out, and I accom-
panied him as far as his office and then returned home
to the Plantiers’ to fetch my mother. There I heard
that she had gone out with my aunt and would not be
back till dinner time, I immediately went down again
to the town where I was very rarely free to go by
myself, and found my way to the port, which was dreary


ti



that day with a sea-fog ; I loitered on the quays for an
hour or so, and then suddenly I was seked with the
desire to go back and take Alissa by surprise, though
indeed I had only just left her. I ran back through the
town and rang at the Bucolins’ door. I was just darting
upstairs when the maid who had let me in stopped me.

* Don’t go up. Master Jerome. Don’t go up I Mistress
is having an attack.’

But I brushed past her. It was not my aunt I had
come to see. . . . AHssa’s room was on the third floor.
On the first there was the drawing-room and the din-
ing-room ; on the second, my aunt’s room, from which
voices were coming. The door past which I had to go
was open and a flood of light came from the room and
fell on the landing : afraid of being seen, I hesitated a
moment and drew back into the dark ; this is what I
beheld to my unspeakable amazement : my aunt was
lying on a sofa in the middle of the room; the curtains
were drawn, and it was illuminated by the cheerful
light of two candelabra full of candles ; Robert and
Juliette were at her feet and behind her was a strange
young man in a lieutenant’s uniform. The presence of
the two children seems to me to-day monstrous ; at
that time in my innocence I thought it reassuring
rather than otherwise. They were laughing and looking
at the stranger, who was saying in a piping voice :

‘BucolinI BucolinI ... If I had a pet lamb I should
certainly call it Bucolin.’

My aunt herself burst out laughing. I saw her hold
out a cigarette for the young man to light, smoke a few
whifls of it and then let it fall to the floor. He rushed
forward to pick it up, made as if he had caught his feet
in a scarf, tripped and fell on his knees before my aunt.


12



Thanks to this ridiculous performance, I was able to
slip by without being noticed.

I found myself outside Alissa’s door. For a moment
I waited. Bursts of laughter and voices came up from
the floor below ; perhaps they drowned the sound of
my knock, for I heard no answer, I pushed the door
and it opened silently. The room was so dark that I did
not at once distinguish Aiissa : she was on her knees
by the bedside ; through the window behind her came
the last glimmer of expiring daylight. She turned
as I came near, but without getting up, and mur-
mured ;

'Oh, Jerome, why have you come back?’

I bent down to kiss her; her face was bathed in
tears. . . .

My whole life was decided by that moment : even to
this day I cannot recall it without a pang of anguish.
Doubtless I understood very imperfectly the cause of
Alissa’s wretchedness, but I felt intensely that that
wretchedness was far too strong for her little quivering
soul, for her fragile body, shaken with sobs.

I remained standing beside her, while she remained
on her knees. I could express nothing of the unfamiliar
transport of my breast, but I pressed her head against
my heart, and I pressed my lips to her forehead, while
my whole soul came flooding through them. Drunken
with love, with pity, with an indistinguishable mixture
of enthusiasm, of self-sacrifice, of virtue, I appealed to
God with all my strength - 1 oflered myself up to Him,
unable to conceive that existence could have any other
object than to shelter this child from fear, from evil,
from life. I knelt down at last, my whole being full of
prayer. I gathered her to me ; vaguely I heard her say i



‘Jerome I They didnT see you, did they? Oh! go
away quickly. They mustn’t see you.’

Then, lower still :

* Jerome, don’t teH anyone. Poor papa doesn’t know
about it.

I told my mother nothing therefore ; but the inter-
minable whisperings that went on between her and
Aunt Plantier, the mysterious, preoccupied, distressed
looks of the two women, the ‘Run along, my dear!’
with which they would get rid of me whenever I came
within earshot of their confabulations, all went to show
that they were not wholly unsuspicious of the Bucolin
family secret.

We had no sooner returned to Paris than a telegram
recalled my mother to Le Havre. My aunt had run
away.

* With anyone? ’ 1 asked Miss Ashburton, with whom
my mother had left me.

‘My dear, you must ask your mother. I can’t tell you
anything,’ said our dear old riiend, whom this event
bad filled with consternation.

Two days later she and I set out to rejoin my mother.
It was a Saturday. I should see my cousins the next day
at church, and that was the one idea that filled my
mind ; for in my childish thoughts I attached great im-
portance to this sanctification of our meeting. After all,
I cared very little for my aunt and made it a point of
honour not to question my mother.

There were not many people that morning in the
little chapel. Pasteur Vautier, no doubt intentionally,
had chosen as his text Christ’s words: * Strive to enter in
at the strait gate *


14



Alissa was sitting a few seats in ficont of me, 1 saw her
face in profile ; I gazed at her so intently and with such
self-oblivion that it seemed as though it were through
her that I heard the words I listened to with such pas-
sionate eagerness. My uncle was sitting beside my
mother, crying.

The pastor first read the whole text: ‘Entsrjs in at
the strait gate: for wide is the gate and broad is the way that
kadeth to destruction ^ and many there be which go in thereat.
Because strait is the gate^ and narrow is the way^ which kadeth
unto lifoy and few there be that find it^

Then, under the difierent headings of his subject he
spoke first of the broad way. , . . With a mind rapt
and as in a dream, I saw my aunt’s room : I saw her
lying on the sofa, laughing; I saw the brilliant officer,
laughing too . . . and the very idea of laughter and of
joy became an offence and an outrage, became, as it
were, the hateful exaggeration of sin I

^ And many there be which go in thereat went on the
pastor; then he painted, and I saw, a gaily dressed,
laughing multitude, advancing in joyous troops, whom
I felt I could not and would not join, because every step
I took with them would lead me further and further
from Alissa, Then the pastor took up again the first
words of his text, and I saw that strait gate through
which we must strive to enter. I fancied it, in the dream
in which I was plunged, as a sort of press into which
I passed with effort and with an extremity of pain, that
yet had in it as well, a foretaste of heavenly felicity.
And again this gate became the door of Alissa’s room ;
in order to enter in at it, I squeezed myself - 1 emptied
myself of all that I contained of selfishness, ,, A Be-
cause strait is the gate which kadeth unto life* went on



Pasteur Vautier ; and beyond all maceration, beyond ail
sorrow, I imagined - 1 bad the presentiment of another
joy, pure, seraphic, mystic, for which my soul was
already athirst. I imagined this joy like the song of a
violin, at once strident and tender, like the pointed
fierceness of a flame, in which AHssa’s heart and mine
were consumed. We advanced together, clothed in
those white robes of which the Apocalypse speaks,
holding each other by the hand, looldng forward to the
same goal. . .. What if these childish dreams should
call up a smile? I repeat them as they came, without
alteration. Their apparent confusion lies only in the
use of words and imperfect images, to convey a feel-
ing that was perfectly definite.

* And few there he that find it^ ended the pastor. He
explained how to find the strait gate — ‘ ¥ew there he ~
I would be one of those. . , .

At the end of the sermon I had reached such a pitch
of moral tension that, without attempting to see my
cousin, as soon as the service was over, I fled - out of
pride, already desiring to put my resolutions (for I had
made resolutions) to the test, and thinking that I should
so best deserve her.



CHAPTER TWO


This austere teaching found my soui ready prepared
and naturally predisposed to duty. My father's and
mother’s example, added to the puritanical discipline
to which they had submitted the earliest impulses of
my heart, inclined me still more towards what I used to
hear called ‘virtue’. Self-control was as natural to me
as self-indulgence to others, and this severity to which
I was subjected, far from being irksome to me, was
soothing. It was not so much happiness which I sought
in the future, as the infinite effort to attain it, and in my
mind I already confounded happiness with virtue. No
doubt, like aU boys of fourteen, I was still unformed
and pliable, but my love for Alissa soon urged me
further and more deliberately along the road on which
I had started. A sudden inward illumination made me
acquainted with myself. I saw myself as a brooding,
half-fledged, wistful creature, somewhat careless of
others, somewhat unenterprising, and with no ambi-
tions save for such victories as are to be gained over
seff. I was fond of my books and cared only for the
games which need reflexion or effort. I did not much
frequent the society of my schoolfellows, and when I
did take part in their amusements, it was only out of
affection or good nature. I made friends, however, with
Abel Vautier who, the following year, joined me in
Paris and was in my form at school. He was an agree-
able, indolent boy, for whom I had more liking than
esteem, but at any rate he was someone with whom I
S.G.— 2 17



could talk about Fongueusemare and Le Havte, wbete
my thoughts were continually flying.

As for my cousin Robert Bucolin, who had been sent
to the same school, he was two forms below us and I
saw him only on Sundays. If he had not been the
brother of my cousins, whom, however, he was very
unlike, I should have taken no pleasure in his society.

I was at that time entirely engrossed by my love, and
it was in its light alone that these two friendships had
any importance for me. Alissa was the Pearl of Great
Price of which the Gospel spoke, and I was like him
who went and sold all that he had to buy it. Child as
I still was, am I wrong in talking of love, and in giving
this name to the feeling I had for my cousin? Nothing
that I experienced later seems to me worthier of that
name - and moreover, when I became old enough to
suffer from the more definite qualms of the flesh, my
feeling did not greatly change in character; I never
sought more directly to possess her whom, as a child,
I had sought only to deserve. Work, efforts, pious acts,
I offered them all up, mystically, to Alissa, and, indeed,
invented a refinement of virtue by which I often left
her in ignorance of what I had done only for her sake.
In this way I became intoxicated, as it were, with the
fumes of modesty, and accustomed myself, alas I re-
gardless of my own comfort, to feel no satisfaction in
anything that did not cost me an effort.

Was I alone to feel the spur of emulation? I do not
think that Alissa was touched by it, or that she did any-
thing for my sake or for me, though all my efforts were
only for her. Everything in her unaffected and artless
soul was of the most natural beauty. Her virtue seemed
like relaxation, so much there was in it of ease and
x8



grace. The gravity of her look was made charming by
her childlike smile ; I recall that gently and tenderly
enquiring look, as she raised her eyes, and can under-
stand how my uncle, in his distress, sought support and
counsel and comfort from his elder daughter. In the
summer that followed I often saw him talking to her.
His grief had greatly aged him ; he spoke Httle at meals,
or sometimes displayed a kind of forced gaiety which
was more painful than his silence. He remained smok-
ing in his study until the hour of the evening when
Alissa would go to fetch him. He had to be persuaded
to go out ; she led him off to the garden like a child.
Together they would go down the flower-walk to-
wards the place at the head of the steps leading down to
the kitchen-garden, where we had put out a few chairs.

One evening, I was lingering out of doors reading,
and as I lay on the grass in the shade of one of the big
copper beeches, separated from the flower-walk only
by the laurel hedge, which prevented me from being
seen but not from hearing, Alissa’s and my under's
voices reached me. They had no doubt been talking of
Robert ; then I heard my name uttered by AHssa, and
I was just beginning to make out their words, when
my uncle exclaimed :

'He! Oh, he will always be fond of work.'

An involuntary listener, my first impulse was to go
away, or at any rate make some movement to show
them that I was there; but what was I to do? Cough?
Call out H am here ; I can hear you'? It was much more
awkwardness and shyness than curiosity to hear more
which kept me quiet. And besides, they were only
passing by and I heard what they said only very indis-
tinctly. But they came on slowly ; Alissa no doubt, as

19



was her habit, with a light basket on her arm, was
cutting off the heads of faded dowers and picking up
from under the espaliers the unripe fruit, which the
frequent sea-mists used so often to bring down. I heatd
her clear voice :

‘Papa, w’as Uncle Palissier a remarkable man?’

My uncle’s voice was low and indistinct : I could not
make out his answer. Alissa insisted: ‘Very remark-
able, do you think?’

Again an inaudible answer and again Alissa’s voice :

‘Jerome is clever, isn’t he?’

How could I help straining to hear? But no 1 1 could
make out nothing. She went on :

‘Do^you think he will become a remarkable man?’

Here my uncle raised his voice ;

‘ First, my dear, I should like to understand what you
mean by “remarkable”. One can be very remarkable
without its showing ~ at any rate in the eyes of men -
very remarkable in the eyes of God.’

‘Yes, that is what I mean,’ said Alissa.

‘And then, one can’t tell yet. He’s too young. Yes,
certainly, he’s very promising, but that’s not enough
for success,’

‘What more must there be?’

‘Oh, my child! I can hardly tell. There must be con-
fidence, support, love

‘What do you mean by support?’ interrupted
Alissa.

‘The affection and esteem that have been lacking to
me,’ answered my uncle, sadly; and then their voices
finally died away.

When I said my prayers that evening, I felt remorse
for my unintentional eavesdropping and resolved to


20



coiifess it to my cousin. Perhaps this time there n^as a
mixture of curiosity in my resolution.

At my first words the next day, she said :

‘But, Jerome, if s very wrong to listen like that. You
ought to have told us you were there or else to have
gone away/

‘Really, I didn’t listen - 1 just overheard you without
meaning to. And you were only passing by.’

‘We were walking slowly.’

‘Yes, but I hardly heard anything. I stopped hearing
almost at once. What did uncle answer when you asked
him what was necessary for success?’

‘Jerome,’ she said, laughing, ‘you heard perfectly
well. You are just making me repeat it for your amuse-
ment.’

‘I really heard only the beginning - when he spoke
of confidence and love.’

‘He said, afterwards, that a great many other things
were necessary.’

‘And you, what did you answer?’

She suddenly became very serious.

‘When he spoke of support in life, I answered that
you had your mother.’

‘Oh, Alissa, you know I shan’t always have her -
And then, it’s not the same thing - ’

She bent her head :

‘That’s what he said too.’

I took her hand, trembling.

‘Whatever I hope to become later is for you.’

‘But, Jerome, I may leave you too.’

My soul went into my words ;

‘ J shall never leave jw.’

She raised her shoulders slightly :


21



‘Aren’t you strong enough to walk alone? We must
each of us find God by ourselves/

‘But you must show me the way/

‘Why do you want any other guide but Christ? Do
you think we are ever nearer to each other than when
each of us forgets the other, as we pray to God?’

‘Yes,’ I interrupted, ‘that He may unite us. That is
what I ask Him morning and evening/

‘Don’t you understand what communion in God
means?’

‘With my whole heart I understand. It means being
rapturously united in the worship of the same thing. I
think it is just because I want to be united to you, that
I worship what I know you worship too.’

‘Then your worship is not pure.’

‘Don’t ask too much of me, I shouldn’t care for
Heaven if you were not there too,’

She put her fingers on her lips and answered with
some solemnity :

‘ “ Seekje first the kingdom of God and His righteousness.^^ *
As I put down our words I feel that they will seem
very unchildlike to those who do not realize the de-
liberate seriousness with which some children talk to
each other. What am I to do? Try to excuse them? No I
no more than I will colour them to make them look
more natural.

We had procured the Gospels in the Vulgate and
knew long passages of them by heart. Alissa had learnt
Latin with me, under the plea of helping her brother,
but really, I think, in order to follow me in my reading.
And indeed, I could hardly bring myself to take plea-
sure in any study in which I knew she would not keep
me company. If this was sometimes a hindrance to me.


22



it was not, as miglit be supposed, because it bampeted
the gtowth of my mind; on the contraty, it was she
who seemed to be everywhere and easily ahead of me.
But the course my mind pursued was always shaped
with reference to her, and what preoccupied us at
that time, what we called ‘thought’, was often merely
the pretext for some more subtle communion,
merely the disguise of feeling, merely the covering of
love.

My mother may at first, perhaps, have been anxious
about a feeling whose depth she had not as yet gauged.
But now that she felt her strength ebbing, she loved to
•gather us together in the same maternal embrace. The
heart disease from which sheTiad long been suffering
began to be more and more troublesome. In the course
of a particularly severe attack she sent for me :

‘My poor boy,’ she said, ‘I’m getting very old. Some
day I shall leave you suddenly.’

She stopped ; her breathing was very difficult. Then
I broke out, irresistibly, with what it seemed to me she
was expecting me to say :

‘ Mamma . . . you know I want to marry Alissa.’ And
my sentence was no doubt the continuation of her
secret thoughts, for she went on at once :

‘Yes, that is what I want to speak to you about, my
Jerome.’

‘Mamma,’ said I, sobbing, ‘you do think she loves
me, don’t you?’

‘ Yes, my child.’ And several times she repeated ten-
derly: ‘Yes, my child.’ She spoke with difiiculty. She
added : ‘ You must leave it to the Lord.’ Then as I was
stooping over her, she put her hand on my head and
said:


25



‘May God keep you, .my children! May God keep
you both! ’ Then she fell into a doze, from which I did
not try to rouse her.

. This conversation was never resumed. The next
morning my mother felt better. I went back to school
and silence closed again over this semi-confidence. In
any case, what more could I have learnt? That Alissa
loved me I could not for a moment doubt. And, even if
I could, doubt would for ever have vanished from my
heart at the time of the melancholy event which oc-
curred soon after.

My mother passed away very quietly one evening
when Miss Ashburton and I were with her. The final
attack which carried her off had not at first seemed
worse than the preceding ones ; it was only towards the
end that it become alarming and we had no time to send
for any of our relations. It was with our old friend that
I watched the first night beside my dear mother^s body.
I loved my mother deeply, and wondered that in spite
of my tears I should feel so little sadness. If I wept it
was out of pity for Miss Ashburton, whose friend - so
many years younger than herself - had thus been taken
by God before her. But the secret thought that this
bereavement would hasten an understanding with my
cousin greatly predominated over my grief.

My uncle arrived the next morning. He handed me
a letter from his daughter, who did not come till the
day after with Aunt Plantler.

^ . . Jerome, my friend, my brother’ [she wrote], . . how
grieved I am not have have been able to speak those few
words to her before her death, which would have given her
that great happiness she desired. May she forgive me now !

24



And may God alone guide us both henceforward! Good-
bye, my poor friend.

am, more tenderly than ever,

‘YourAlissa/

What could be the meaning of this letter? What were
those words that she was grieved not to have uttered -
what could they be but those with which she would
have plighted our future? I was still so young, how-
ever, that I dared not ask her for her hand at once.
And besides, what need had I of her promise? Were we
not already as good as engaged? Our love was no secret
from our relations ; my uncle was no more opposed to
it than my mother had been; on the contrary, he
treated me already as a son.

I spent the Easter holidays, which began a few days
later, at Le Havre, sleeping at Aunt Plantier’s and tak-
ing nearly all my meals at Uncle Bucolin’s.

My aunt F^Hde Plantier was the best of women, but
neither my cousins nor I were on very intimate terms
with her. She was in a continual state of breathless
bustle ; her gestures were ungentle and her voice un-
musical; she harried us with caresses and at odd mo-
ments of the day, when the need for efiusion seized her,
she woudd suddenly overwhelm us with the floods of
her affection. Uncle Bucolin was very fond of her, but
merely from the tone of his voice when he spoke to her,
it was easy to understand how greatly he had preferred
my mother.

‘My poor boy,^ she began one evening, ‘I don't
know what you are meaning to do this summer, but I
will wait to hear your plans before settling my own : if
I can be useful to you

‘I have not thought much about it yet,' I answered.
‘Perhaps I shall travel.*


25



She went on :

‘You know that both here and at Fongueusemare
you will always be welcome. You will be doing your
uncle and Juliette a pleasure by going to them . , , '

‘Alissa, you mean.’

‘ 0£ course. I beg your pardon. . . . Would you be-
lieve it? I thought it was Juliette you were in love
with! Until a month ago - when your uncle told me -
you know Fm very fond of you all, but I don’t know
you very well ; Fve seen so little of you. . . . And then
Fm not very observant ; I have no time to mind other
people’s business. I always saw you playing with Juli-
ette - 1 thought to myself, she’s so pretty, so gay

‘Yes, I like playing with her still, but it’s Alissa I
love.’

‘All right, all right! It’s your aMr. As for me, I
hardly know her at all, so to speak. She talks less than
her sister. I suppose as you’ve chosen her you must
have good reasons for it.’

‘But, Aunt, I didn’t choose to love her, and Fve
never thought what reasons I had for

‘Don’t be cross, Jerome. I didn’t mean anything.
Now, you’ve made me forget what I wanted to say.
Oh, yes! I suppose, of course, it’ll all end with your
marrying ; but it wouldn’t be quite proper for you to
become engaged just yet because of your mourning ~
and then you’re still very young. I thought, now that
your mother isn’t there, your staying at Fongueuse-
mare mightn’t be considered quite the thing.’

‘But, Aunt, that’s just why I spoke of travelling.’

‘Oh, well, my dear, I thought that my presence there
might make things easier and Fve arranged to keep
part of the summer free.’


26



‘If I asked Miss Ashburton she would certainly
come with pleasure/

‘Yes, I know she’s coming already. But that’s not
enough 1 I will come too. Oh 1 1 don’t pretend I shall
take your poor mother’s place,’ she added, suddenly
bursting into sobs, ‘but I can look after the house-
keeping - and - well - you and your uncle and Alissa
needn’t' feel uncomfortable.’

Aunt Felicie was mistaken as to the efficacy of her
presence. To tell the truth we were only uncomfortable
because of her. In accordance with her announcement,
she settled herself at Fongueusemare at the beginning
of July, and Miss Ashburton and I joined her there
soon after.

Under the pretence of helping Alissa to look after it,
she filled the house, which had always been so peaceful,
with a continual hubbub. The zeal with which she set
about being agreeable to us and ‘ making things easier’,
as she called it, was so overdone that Alissa and I were
nearly always constrained and practically speechless
when she was by. She must have thought us very cold,
... And even if we had not been silent, would she
have been able to understand the nature of our love?
Juliette’s character, on the other hand, fitted in well
enough with this exuberance ; and perhaps my affection
for my aunt was tinged with a certain resentment at
seeing her show such a marked preference for the
younger of her nieces.

One morning, after the arrival of the post, she sent
for me :

‘My poor Jerome,’ she said, ‘I’m absolutely heart-
^1



btoken ; my daughter is ill and wants me ; I shall be
obliged to leave yon. . .

Puffed up with idle scruples, I went to find my uncle,
not knowing whether I should dare to stay on at Fon-
gueusemare after my aunt's departure. But at my first
words :

'What,' he cried, ‘^will my poor sister think of next
to complicate what is so very natural? Why should you
leave us, Jerome? Aren't you already almost my child? '

My aunt had barely stayed a fortnight at Fongueuse-
mare. As soon as she was gone the house was able to
sink back again into peace. There dwelt in it once more
a serenity that was very like happiness. My mourning
had not cast a shadow on our love, but had made it
weightier. And in the monotonous course of the life
which then began, as if in some place of high reson-
ance, each slightest stirring of our hearts was audible.

Some days after my aunt's departure I remember we
were discussing her one evening at table :

‘What a commotion! ' said we. ‘Is it possible that the
stir of life should leave her soul so little respite? Fair
image of love, what becomes of your reflexion here?'
. . . For we remembered Goethe's saying about Madame
de Stein : ‘It would be beautiftd to see the world re-
flected in that soul.' And we then and there established
a kind of hierarchy, putting the contemplative faculties
in the highest place. My unde, who up to then had
been silent, reproved us, smiling sadly :

‘My children,’ said he, ‘God will recognize His
image even though broken. Let us beware of judging
men from a single moment of their lives. Everything
which you dislike in my poor sister is the result of cir-
cumstances, with which I am too well acquainted to be
z8



able to a:itici2e her as severely as you do. There Is not a
single pleasing quality of youth which may not deterio-
rate in old age. What you call ^‘commotion’^ in Felicic,
was at jSxst nothing but charming high spirits, spon-
taneity, impulsiveness, and grace. We were not very
different, I assure you, from what you are to-day. I was
rather like you, Jerome - more so, perhaps, than I
imagine. Felicie greatly resembled Juliette as she now
is ~ yes, even physically - and I catch a likeness to her
by starts,’ he added, turning to his daughter, ‘in cer-
tain sounds of your voice : she had your smile - and
that trick, which she soon lost, of sitting sometimes,
like you, without doing anything, her elbows in front
of her and her forehead pressed against the locked
fingers of her hands.’

Miss Ashburton turned towards me and said almost
in a whisper :

‘It is your mother that Alissa is like.’

The summer that year was splendid. The whole
world seemed steeped in azure. Our fervour triumphed
over evil - over death; the shades gave way before us.
Every morning I was awakened by my joy; I rose at
dawn and sprang to meet the coming day. . . . When I
dream of that time, it comes back to me aU fresh with
dew. Juliette, an earlier riser than her sister, whose
habit it was to sit up very late at nights, used to come
out into the garden with me. She was the messenger
between her sister and me ; I talked to her interminably
of our love, and she never seemed tired of listening.
I told her what I dared not tell AHssa, with whom ex-
cess of love made me constrained and shy. Alissa
seemed to lend herself to this child’s play and to be
29



dcHghtcd that I should talk so happily to her sister,
ignoring or feigning to ignore that in reality we talked
only of her.

Oh, lovely shifts of love, of love’s very excess, by
what hidden ways you led us, from laughter to tears,
from the most artless joy to the exactions of virtue!

The summer sped by so pure, so smooth, that of its
swift-slipping days scarce anything remains in my
memory. Its only events were talks and readings.

*I have had a melancholy dream,’ said Alissa to me
on one of the last mornings of the holidays. ‘I was alive
and you were dead. No, I didn’t see you die. It was
merely - that you were dead. It was horrible ; it was so
impossible, that I managed to get it granted for you to
be simply absent. We were parted and I felt that there
was a way of getting to you ; I tried to find out how,
and I made such an effort to succeed that it woke
me up.

‘ This morning I think I was under the impression of
my dream ; it seemed as if it were stiU going on. I felt
as if I were still parted from you - going to be parted
from you for a long, long time -’ and she added very
low : ‘ aU my life - and that all our lives we should have
to make a great effort . . . ’

‘Why?’

‘Each of us a great effort to come together again.’

I did not take these words seriously, or perhaps I was
afraid to take them seriously. With a beating heart, and
in a sudden fit of courage, I said to her, as though
protesting :

‘Well, as for me, this morning I dreamt that I was
going to marry you - so surely, that nothing, nothing
would be able to part us, except death.’

30



"Do you think that death is able to part?’ asked
she.

" I mean - *

"I think that death, on the contrary, is able to bring
together - yes, bring together what has been parted in
Hfe.’

The whole of this conversation sank into us so
deeply that I can still hear the very intonation of the
words we used. And yet I did not realize all their
gravity until later.

The summer sped by. Already nearly all the fields lay
bare, with their wider spaces more emptied of hope.
The evening before - no, two evenings before my de-
parture, I went out with Juliette and we wandered
down to the shrubbery at the end of the lower garden.

"What were you repeating yesterday to Alissa?' she
asked.

"When do you mean?’

"When you stayed behind us on the quarry bench.’

"Oh! Some verses of Baudelaire’s, I think.’

‘What were they? Won’t you say them to me?’

nous plongerons dans les froides tenons I
began rather ungraciously ; but no sooner had I started
than she interrupted me and took up the lines in a
changed and trembling voice ; ^ Adieu! vine clarti de
nos etes trop courts '

"What! you know them?’ I cried, extremely aston-
ished. "I thought you didn’t care for poetry ’

‘Why? Because you never repeat me any?’ said she,
laughing, though in rather a forced way. ‘Sometimes
you seem to think I’m perfectly idiotic.’

‘It’s quite possible to be very intelligent and not care

3 ^



fot poetry. I’ve never heard you repeat any or ask me
to repeat you any.’

‘Because that’s Alissa’s business.’ She was silent
for a few minutes and then asked abruptly : ^

‘You’re going away the day after to-morrow?’

‘Yes, I must.’

‘ What are you going to do this winter?
s my first year at the ficole Normale.’

‘ When do you think of marrying Alissa? ’

‘Not before I’ve done my military service. And in-
deed, not before I have a better idea of what I mean to
do afterwards.’

‘Don’t you know yet?’

‘I don’t want to know yet. Too many things appeal
to me. I want to put off for as long as I can having to
choose and settle down to only one thing.’

‘ Is it reluctance to settle down that makes you put off
getting engaged too?’ ^ ^

I shrugged my shoulders without answering, one

insisted : ^

‘ Then, what are you waiting for? Why don t you get

engaged at once?’

‘Why should we get engaged? Isn’t it enough to
know that we do and shall belong to each other, with-
out proclaiming it to the world? Since I choose to de-
vote my whole life to her, do you think it would be
nobler to bind my love by promises? Not I! Vows
seem to me to be an insult to love. I should only want
to be engaged if I distrusted her.’

‘It isn’t Alissa that I distrust -’

We were walking slowly. We had reached that part
of the garden where, in former days, I had uninten-
tionally overheard the conversation between Alissa and

3 ^



her father. It suddenly occurred to me that perhaps
Aiissa, whom I had seen go out into the garden, was
sitting at the head of the steps, and that she would be
able to overhear us in the same nianner ; the possibility
of making her listen to words which I dared not say to
her openly, tempted me ; I was amused by the artifice
and raising my voice :

‘ Oh! ’ I exclaimed' with the somewhat stilted vehem-
ence of youth, and too much engrossed by my own
words to hear in Juliette’s all that she left unsaid : ^Oh,
if only we could lean over the soul we love and see as
in a mirror the image we cast there! - read in another
as in ourselves, better than in ourselves! What tran-
quillity there would be in our tenderness - what purity
in our love!’

I had the conceit to take JuHette’s emotion for an
effect of my very indifferent flight of eloquence. She
suddenly hid her face on my shoulder ;

‘Jerome 1 Jerome 1 1 wish I could be sure you would
make her happy ! If she were to suffer through you as
well, I think I should detest you! ’

‘Why, Juliette,’ I cried, embracing her and raising
her head, ‘I should detest myself. If you only knew!
Why, it’s only that I may begin life better with her, that
I don’t want to settle on my career yet 1 Why, it is upon
her that I hang my whole jEuture. Why, I want none of
the things that I might be without her -’

‘And what does she say when you speak to her
so?’

‘I never speak to her so! Never; and that’s another
reason why we’re not engaged yet ; there is never any
question of marriage between us, nor of what we shall
do hereafter. Oh, Juliette! life wkh her seems to me so

33



lovely that I date not - do you understand - 1 dare not

Speak to her about it.’ ^ ^

‘ You want happiness to come on her as a surpnse.
‘Nol that’s not it. But I’m frightened - of fngMen-
ing her. Do you see? I’m aftaid that the immense hap-
piness, which I foresee, may frighten ^er. One fay I
Iskti her whether she wanted to travel. She said that
she wanted nothing, that it was enough for her to know
that foreign countries existed, and that they were
beautiEul, and that other people were able to go to
them”’

* And you, Jerome, do you want to travel .

‘Yes, everywhere! All life seems to me Hke a long
iourney - with her, through books and people and
countries. Have you ever thought of the meaning of

the words “weighing anchor ? , t,

‘Yes, I often think of them,’ she murmured. But
barely listening to her, and letting her words drop to
earth, like poor, hurt birds, I went on :

‘To start one night; to wake up in the dazzling
brilliancy of morning ; to feel oneself together and
alone on the uncertain waves

‘To arrive in a port, which one has seen on the map
as a child ; where everything is strange - 1 i^gine you
on the gangway, leaving the boat with Alissa leamng
on your arm.’

‘ We should hurry off to the post,’ added I, laughing,
‘to get the letter which Juliette would have written to
US - ’

‘ From Fongueusemare, where she would have stayed
behind, and which you would remember as - oh, so
tiny, and so sad, and so far away ”

Were those her words exactly? I cannot be sure for,

34



I repeat, I was so full of my love that, beside it, I was
scarcely aware of any expression but its own.

We were drawing near the steps, and were just going
to turn back, when AHssa suddenly appeared from out
of the shade. She was so pale that Juliette uttered an
exclamation.

"Yes, I don’t feel very well,’ Aiissa stammered
hastily. " The air is rather chilly. I think I had better go
in.’ And leaving us there and then, she went hurriedly
back towards the house.

" She overheard what we were saying,’ cried Juliette,
as soon as she was a little way off.

" But we didn’t say anything which could have vexed
her. On the contrary

" Ohl Let me alone,’ said she, and darted off in pur-
suit of her sister.

That night I could not sleep. Aiissa had come down
to dinner, but had retired immediately afterwards, com-
plaining of a headache. What had she heard of our con-
versation? I anxiously went over in my mind every-
thing we had said. Then I thought that perhaps I had
been wrong to walk so close to Juliette and to let my
arm sHp round her ; but it was the habit of childhood,
and many a time AUssa had seen us walking so. Ah I
blind wretch that I was, groping after my own errors,
not to have thought for a moment that Juliette’s
words, to which I had paid so little attention, and
which I remembered so ill, might perhaps have been
better understood by AHssa. No matter I Led astray by
my anxiety, terrified at the idea that Aiissa might dis-
trust me, and imagining no other peril, I resolved,
in spite of what I had said to JuHette, and influenced,

55



perhaps, by what she had said to me -I resolved to
overcome my scruples and apprehensions and to bc-
trothe myself the following day.

It was the eve of my departure. Her sadness, I
thought, might be ascribed to that. She seemed to avoid
me. The day passed without my being able to see her
alone. The fear of being obliged to leave before speak-
ing to her sent me to her room a little before dinner.
She was putting on a coral necklace, and, her arms
raised to fasten it, she was bending forward, with her
back turned to the door, looking at herself over her
shoulder, in a mirror between two Hghted candies. It
was in the mirror that she first caught sight of me, and
she continued to look at me in it for some moments
without turning round.

‘Why,* said she, ‘wasn’t the door shut?*

‘I knocked, but you didn’t answer. Alissa, you know
I*m going to-morrow?*

She answered nothing, but laid down the necklace,
which she could not succeed in fastening. The word
‘engagement* seemed to me too bare, too brutal; I
used I know not what periphrasis in its stead. As soon
as Alissa understood what 1 meant, I thought I saw her
sway and lean against the mantelpiece for support - but
I myself was trembling so much that in my fearfulness
I avoided looking at her.

I was near her, and without raising my eyes, I took
her hand ; she did not free herself, but bending down
her face a little and raising my hand a Httie, she put her
lips on it and murmured, as she half leant against me :

‘No, Jerome, no; don’t, please, let us be en-
gaged.*


36



My heart was beating so fast, that I think she felt it,
and she repeated, more tenderly :

‘No, not yet

And as I asked her :

‘Why?’

‘It’s I that ought to ask you why,’ she said. ‘Why
change?’

I did not dare speak to her of yesterday’s conversa-
tion, but no doubt she felt I was thinking of it, and as
if in answer to my thought, said, as she looked at me
earnestly :

‘ You are wrong, dear. I do not need so much happi-
ness. Are we not happy enough as we are?’

She tried in vain to smile.

‘No, since I have to leave you.’

‘ Listen, Jerome, I can’t speak to you this evening -
don’t let’s spoil our last minutes. No, no, I’m as fond
of you as ever; don’t be afraid. I’ll write to you ; I’ll
explain. I promise I’ll write to you - to-morrow - as
soon as you have gone. Leave me now! See, I am cry-
ing, You must go.’

She pushed me away, tore me gently from her - and
that was our good-bye ; for that evening I was not able
to speak to her again, and the next morning, when it
was time for me to leave, she shut herself up in her
room. I saw her at her window, waving good-bye to
me as she watched my carriage drive off.


57



CHAPTER THREE


I HAD hardly seen AbelVautler that year; he had en-
listed without waiting to be called up, whilst I, in the
meantime, had been reading for my degree. I was two
years younger than Abel, and had put off my military
service until after leaving the ficole Normale, where we
were both of us to go for our first term that year.

We met again with pleasure. After leaving the army,
he had spent more than a month travelling. I was afraid
of finding him changed ; but he had merely acquired
more confidence without losing any of his charm. We
spent the afternoon before the opening day of the term
in the Luxembourg gardens ; unable to restrain myself
from confiding in him, I spoke to him at length about
my love for Alissa, which, for that matter, he knew of
already. During the last year he had acquired some ex-
perience of women, and, in consequence, put on rather
a conceited and patronizing manner, which, however,
did not offend me. He laughed at me for not having
finally managed to clinch the matter, as he expressed it,
giving forth as an axiom, that a woman should never
be given time to go back on herself. I let him talk, but
thought to myself that his excellent arguments were not
applicable either to her or to me, and simply showed
that he did not understand us.

The day after our arrival I received the following
letter ;

* My dear Jerome,

* I have been thinking a great deal about your suggestion/

38



[My suggestion! What a way of speaking of our engage-
ment !] * I am afraid I am too old for you. Perhaps you don*t
think so now, because you have had no opportunity yet of
seeing anything of other women. But I keep thinking of
what I should suffer later on, if after I had given myself to
you, I were to find out that you were no longer able to care
for me. You will be very indignant, no doubt, as you read
this; I think I hear you protesting; it’s not that I doubt
your love - 1 simply ask you to wait a little longer until you
arc rather better acquainted with life.

‘ Please understand that I am speaking only of you - as for
myself, I feel sure that I shall never cease to love you.

*Alissa.’.

Cease to love each other! Could there be any ques-
tion of such a thing? I was more astonished than
grieved, but so greatly disturbed that I hurried off to
show the letter to Abel.

‘Well, what do you mean to do? ^ said he, after he had
read the letter, shaking his head and screwing up his
lips as he did so. I made a despairing gesture. ‘At any
rate, I hope you aren’t going to answer her! If you
begin arguing with a woman you’re lost. Listen to me :
if we were to sleep at Le Havre on Saturday night, we
might spend Sunday morning at Fongueusemare, and
be back here in time for the lecture on Monday morn-
ing. I haven’t seen your people since my military ser-
vice. That’s excuse enough ; and a very creditable one.
If AHssa sees that it’s only an excuse, so much the
better. I’ll look after Juliette whilst you talk to her
sister. Try not to play the fool. To tell you the truth,
there’s something I can’t understand in your tale; you
can’t have told me everything. Never mind! m soon
get to the bottom of it. Mind you don’t let them know

39



we’re coming : you must take your cousin by surprise
and not give her time to arm herself.’

My heart was beating fast as I pushed open the gar-
den gate. Juliette came running to meet us at once.
Alissa, who was busy in the linen room, made no haste
to come down. We were talking to my uncle and Miss
Ashburton when at last she entered the drawing-room.
If our sudden arrival had upset her, at any rate she
managed to show no signs of it. I thought of what Abel
had said, and that it was precisely with the intention of
arming herself against me, that she had been so long
before making her appearance. Juliette’s extreme ani-
mation made her reserve seem colder still. I felt that
she disapproved of my return ; at any rate she tried to
show disapprobation in her manner, and I dared not
imagine that behind this disapprobation there might be
hidden another and a livelier feeling. Seated at some
distance apart from us, in a corner near the window,
she seemed absorbed in a piece of embroidery, the
stitches of which she was counting below her breath.
Abel talked - fortunately! for, as for me, I felt incap-
able of saying a word, and if it had not been for the
tales he told of his year’s service and his travels, this
meeting would have had a dismal beginning. My uncle
himself seemed unusually thoughtful.

Immediately after lunch, Juliette took me aside and
drew me into the garden :

‘What do you think?’ said she, when we were alone,
‘I’ve had an offer of marriage! Aunt F^licie wrote to
papa yesterday to tell him she had had a proposal for me
from a Nimes vine-grower ; a person who is very satis-
factory in every way, she says ; he met me out at some
parties last spring and fell in love with me.’


40



^And did this individual make any impression on
you?’ I questioned with an instinctive feeling of hos-
tility towards the suitor.

‘ Yes, I think I remember him. A kind of cheery Don
Quixote - not cultivated - very ugly ~ very vulgar -
rather ridiculous ; Aunt Felicie couldn’t keep her coun-
tenance before him.’

‘ Has he any - chance?’ I asked, mockingly.

"Oh, Jerome! How can you? A man who’s in busi-
ness ! ... If you’d seen him you wouldn’t ask.’

"And has my uncle answered?’

"He answered what I did ~ that I was too young to
marry. Unfortunately,’ she added, laughing, ‘Aunt
foresaw that objection: in a postscript she says that
Monsieur fidouard Teissites - that’s Ms name - is will-
ing to wait, that he has simply declared Mmself so soon
in order to be put ‘‘on the ranks”. It’s absurd, but what
am I to do? All the same, I can’t tell Mm he’s too ugly.’

"No, but you can say that you don’t want to marry a
vine-grower.’

She shrugged her shoulders :

" That’s a kind of reason Aunt’s mind is incapable of
taking in. But let’s talk of sometMng else. Has Alissa
written to you?’

She spoke with extreme volubility and seemed In
great agitation. I handed her Alissa’s letter, wMch she
read, blushing deeply. I seemed to discern a note of
anger in her voice as she asked me :

"Then what are you going to do?’

"I don’t know,’ I answered, "Now that I am here, I
feel as if it would have been easier to write, and I blame
myself for coming. Can you understand what she
means?’


41



understand she wants to leave you free.’

Tree I What do I care for freedom? And can you
understand why she writes to me so?’

She answered ‘No I’ so shortly that, without at all
divining the truth, I at least felt persuaded from that
moment that Juliette probably knew something about
it. Then, abruptly turning back as we came to a bend in
the path : ‘ Let me be now/ she said. ‘ You haven’t come
here to talk to me. We have been together a great deal
too long.’

She fled off to the house, and a moment later I heard
her at the piano.

When I went back to the drawing-room she was
talking to Abel, who had joined her there ; she went on
playing as she talked, though carelessly, and as if she
were vaguely improvising. I left them. I went into the
garden and wandered about some time, looking for
Alissa.

She was at the bottom of the orchard, picking the
first chrysanthemums at the foot of a low wall. The
smell of the flowers mingled with that of the dead
leaves in the beech copse and the air was saturated with
autumn. The sun did no more now than just warm the
espaliers, but the sky was orientally pure. Her face was
framed, hidden nearly, in the depths of a big Dutch
peasant’s cap, which Abel had brought back from his
travels and which she had at once put on. She did not
turn as I drew near, but I saw by the slight tremor
which she could not repress, that she had recognized
my step; and I began at once to fortify myself against
her reproaches and the severity which I felt her look
was going to impose upon me. But when, as I came
42



closer and, as if afraid, began to slacken my pace, she,
although still she did not turn but kept her head
lowered as a sulky child might do, stretched out to
me from behind her back her hand full of flowers, and
seemed to beckon me on. And as, on the contrary, at
sight of this gesture I came to a standstill in a spirit of
playfulness, she turned round at last and took a few
steps towards me, raising her face ; and I saw that it
was all full of smiles. The brightness of her look made
everything seem on a sudden simple again and easy, so
that without an effort and with an unaltered voice, I
began :

^It was your letter that brought me back.’

‘ I thought so,’ said she, and then softening the sharp-
ness of her rebuke by the inflexion of her voice ; ‘and
that is what vexed me. Why didn’t you like what I
said? It was very simple, though.’ (And indeed, sadness
and difficulty seemed now nothing but imagination,
seemed now to exist only in my mind.) ‘ We were happy
so ; I told you we were ; why be astonished at my refus-
ing when you ask me to change? ’

And indeed I felt happy with her, so perfectly happy,
that the one desire of my mind was that it should differ
in nothing from hers, and already I wished for nothing
beyond her smile, and to walk with her thus, hand in
hand, along a sun-warmed, flower-bordered path.

‘If you prefer it,’ said I gravely, renouncing at one
stroke every other hope, and giving myself up to the
perfect happiness of the present, ‘ ... If you prefer it, we
will not be engaged. When I got your letter, I did in
fact realize that I was happy and that my happiness wa«
going to cease. Oh I give me back the happiness that I
had ; I can’t do without it. I love you well enough to

43



wait for you ail my life, but that you should cease to
love me or that you should doubt my love, that
thought, Alissa, is unbearable to me/

* Alasl Jerome, I cannot doubt it/

And her voice, as she said this, was at once calm and
sad ; but the smile which illuminated her remained so
serenely beautiful that I was ashamed of my fears and
protestations ; it seemed to me then, that from them
alone came that touch of sadness which I felt lurking in
her^ voice. Without any transition, I began speaking of
my plans and of the new life from which I was expect-
ing to derive so much benefit. The ficole Normale was
not at that time what it has since become ; its somewhat
rigorous discipline, irksome only to young men of an
indolent or refractory disposition, was helpful to those
whose minds were bent on study. I was glad that this
almost monastic way of life should preserve me from
the world, which at best attracted me but little ; the
knowledge that Alissa feared it for me would have
been enough to make It appear hateful.

Miss Ashburton had kept on the apartment she had
shared with my mother in Paris. As Abel and I knew
hardly anyone in Paris, we should spend some hours of
every Sunday with her ; every Sunday I should write to
AHssa and keep her informed of every detail of my
life.

We were now sitting on the edge of an open garden
feme through which were sprawling huge stalks of
cucumber plants, the last fruits of which had been
gathered. Alissa listened to me, questioned me. I had
never before felt her tenderness more solicitous, her
affection more pressing. Fear, care, the slightest stir of
emotion even, evaporated in her smile, melted away in

44



this delightful intimacy, like the mist in the perfect
blueness of the sky.

Then when Juliette and Abel came out to join us, we
spent the rest of the day on a bench in the beech copse,
reading aloud Swinburne’s Triumph of Time, each of us
taking a verse by turns. Evening drew in.

When the time came for us to be going, Alissa kissed
me good-bye, and then half playfully, but still with that
elder sister air, which was perhaps called for by my
thoughtlessness, and which she was fond of assuming,
' Come,’ said she, ‘promise me you won’t be so roman-
tic for the future.’

‘Well, are you engaged?’ asked Abel, as soon as we
vrere again alone together.

‘My dear fellow, there’s no question of that now,’
I answered, adding at once in a tone that cut short any
further questioning, ‘and a very good thing too. I have
never been happier in my life than I am to-night.’

‘Nor I either!’ he cried; then, abruptly flinging his
arms around me : ‘I’ve got something wonderful to tell
you, something extraordinary! Jerome, I’m madly in
love with Juliette! I suspected as much as long ago as
last year ; but I’ve seen life since then, and I didn’t want
to tell you anything about it until I’d met your cousins
again. Now it’s all up with me! It’s for hfe.

J’aimc, que dis-jc aimet - j^idolitre Juliette!

I’ve thought for a long time past that I had a kind of
brother-in-law’s affection for you.’

Then, laughing and joking, he embraced me again
and again, flinging himself about like a child, on the
cushions of the railway carriage that was taking us to
Paris. I was absolutely astounded by his announcement;

45



and the sHght strain of literary aifectadon which I felt
in it jarred on me not a little ; but how was it possible
to hold out against such vehemence and such rapture?

‘Well, what? Have you proposed to her?’ I managed
to ask between two bursts of excitement.

‘No, no, certainly notP cried he ; ‘I don’t want to
skip the most charuxing part of the story.

Le meillcuf moment des amours
N*est pas quand on a dit : je t*aimc. . . .

Come now, you aren’t going to reproach me with that,
are you? You ~ such a past master of slowness your-
self 1 ’ ''

‘Well, at any rate,’ I said, slightly irritated, ‘do you
think that she ...?’

‘Didn’t you nodee her embarrassment when she saw
me again? And the whole time of our visit, her agita-
tion, and her blushes and her volubility I No ! you no-
ticed nothing, of course 1 Because you’re completely
taken up with Alissa. And how she questioned me!
How she drank in my words 1 Her intelligence has tre-
mendously developed since last year. I don’t know
where you got it that she doesn’t like reading ; you
always imagine that AHssa’s the only person who can
do anything! My dear boy, it’s astonishing what she
knows. Can you guess what we were amusing our-
selves by doing before dinner? Repeating one of
Dante’s Canzoni I We each of us said a line, and when
I went wrong she corrected me. You know, the one
that begins :

Amor che nella mente mi ragiona.

You didn’t tell me that she had learnt Italian.’

‘I didn’t know it myself,’ said I, rather astonished.

46



‘What? When we began the Canzone, she told me it
was you who had shown it to her.’

‘ She must have heard me read it to her sister one day
when she was sitting with us, doing her needlework, as
she often does ; but I’m blessed if she ever let on that
she understood.’

‘Really! You and Alissa are amazing with your
egoism. You are so much absorbed In your own love,
that you can’t spare a glance for the admirable flower-
ing of an intelligence and a soul like hers 1 1 don’t want
to flatter myself, but aU the same it was high time that I
appeared on the scene. No, no I I’m not angry with you,
as you see,’ said he, embracing me again. ‘Only pro-
mise me - not a word of any of this to Alissa. I want to
conduct my aflSairs by myself. Juliette is caught, that’s
certain, and fast enough for me to venture to leave her
till next holidays. I think I shan’t even write to her be-
tween this and then. But we will spend the Christmas
vacations at Le Havre, and then - ’

‘And then?’

‘ Weil, Alissa will suddenly learn of our engagement. I
mean to push it through smartly. And do you know
what will happen? Why II shall get you Alissa’s con-
sent by force of our example. You can’t pull it off for
yourself, but we shall persuade her that we can’t get
married before you. . . . ’

So he went on, drowning me in an inexhaustible flow
of words, which did not stop even on the train’s arrival
in Paris, even on our getting back to the Normale, for
though we walked all the way from the station to the
school, he insisted, in spite of the lateness of the hour,
on accompanying me to my room, where we went on
talking till morning.


47



AbeFs enthusiasm made short work of the present
and the future. He already saw and described our
double wedding; imagined and painted everybody’s
surprise and joy ; became enamoured of the beauty of
our story, of our friendship, of the part he was to play
in my love affair. Far from being proof against so flat-
tering a warmth, I felt myself pervaded by it, and gently
succumbed to the allurement of his fanciful sug-
gestions. Thanks to our love, courage and ambition
swelled in us ; we were hardly to have left the ficole
Normale when our double marriage (the ceremony
to be performed by Pasteur Vautier) would take
place and we should all four start on our wedding
journey ; then we were each to embark on some monu-
mental work, with our wives as collaborators. Abel,
for whom the schoolmaster’s profession had no attrac-
tions, and who thought he was born to be a writer,
would rapidly earn the fortune of which he stood in
need, by a few successful plays. As for me, more at-
tracted by learning itself than by the thought of any
gain that might accrue from it, my plan was to devote
myself to the study of religious philosophy, of which I
purposed writing the history - but what avails it now
to recall so many hopes?

The next day we plunged into our work.


48



CHAPTER FOUR


The time till the Christmas holidays was so short
that my faith, quickened as it had been by my last con-
versation with Alissa, never for a moment wavered. As
I had resolved, I wrote to her at length every Sunday;
during the rest of the week I kept apart from my fellow-
students, and frequented hardly anyone but Abel : I
lived with the thought of Alissa, and covered my
favourite books with notes meant for her eye, sub-
ordinating the interest I sought in them myself to the
interest which they might have for her. Her letters
caused me some uneasiness ; and though she answered
mine pretty regularly, her keenness to keep up with me
seemed, I thought, to come more from anxiety to en-
courage my work than from her own spontaneous in-
clination ; and it even seemed to me that, while on my
part reflexions, discussions, criticisms were only means
towards expressing my thoughts, she, on the contrary,
took advantage of all these things to conceal hers.
Sometimes I wondered whether she were not actually
taking pleasure in this as a kind of game. No matter 1
I was firmly resolved to complain of nothing, and I let
no trace of anxiety transpire in my letters.

Towards the end of December, then, Abel and I
left for Le Havre.

I was to stay with Aunt Plantier. She was not in
when I arrived, but I had hardly time to settle into my
room when a servant came to tell me that she was
waiting for me in the drawing-room.

S.G.— 3 49



She had no sooner finished enquiring after my health,
my surroundings, my studies, than, without more ado,
she gave way to her affectionate curiosity :

‘You haven’t told me yet, my dear, whether you
were pleased with your stay at Fongueusemare? Were
you able to advance matters at all?’

I had to put up with my aunt’s good-natured tactless-
ness, however painful it might be to hear her speak so
summarily of feelings for which the purest and gentlest
words would still have seemed too brutal ; yet her tone
was so simple and so cordial that it would have been
senseless to take offence. Nevertheless, I could not help
objecting a little.

‘Didn’t you say last spring that you thought an
engagement would be premature?’

‘Yes, I know; one always says that to begin with,’
she started off again, seizing one of my hands, which
she pressed with emotion between both of hers. ‘Be-
sides, on account of your studies and your military
service, you won’t be able to marry for several years,
I know. Moreover, personally I don’t approve of long
engagements. They’re trying for young girls, though
sometimes it’s very touching to see . . . for that matter
it’s not necessary to make the engagement public ...
only then one can give people to understand - oh I very
discreetly - that there’s no further need to be on the
look-out ; and besides, it authorizes your correspond-
ence, your intimacy; and moreover, if anyone else
came forward - and it might very well happen,* she
insinuated with a knowing smile, ‘one is able just to
hint that ... no, it’s not worth while. You know there’s
been an offer for Juliette 1 She has attracted a great deal
of attention this winter. She’s still rather young, which
50



is what she answered ; but the young man suggested
waiting ; he’s not exactly a young man, cither ... in
short, he’s a very good match, a very reliable person.
Weil I you’ll see him to-morrow ; he’s going to be at my
Christmas tree. You’ll tell me what you think of him.’

‘I’m afraid, Aunt Felicie, that it’s labour lost on his
part, and that Juliette has someone else in her mind,’
said I, making a great effort not to mention Abel
straight off.

‘Hum?’ said Aunt Felicie, enquiringly, and putting
her head on one side with an incredulous look. ‘You
surprise me I Why should she not have told me any-
thing about it?’

I bit my lips to prevent myself from saying any-
thing more.

‘Oh, well I we shall soon see, Juliette hasn’t been
very well lately,’ she went on. ‘ . but we aren’t speak-
ing of her for the moment. Ah I Alissa is very charming
too. Come now, did you or did you not make your
declaration?’

Although rebelling with my whole heart against the
word ‘declaration’, which seemed to me so inappro-
priate and crude, I was incapable of replying by a false-
hood to this direct question ; I answered ‘ Yes,’ in some
confusion, and felt my face flame as I did so.

‘And what did she say?’

I bent my head: I should have liked not to answer.
In still greater confusion and as though in spite of my-
self, I said, ‘ She refused to be engaged.’

‘Weil, the child was quite right,’ said my aunt. ‘ You
have plenty of time before you. Heaven knows, .

‘Oh I Auntl that’s enough now,’ I said, trying in
vain to stop her.



* Besides, I’m not surprised; 1 always thought your
cousin more sensible than you. . .

I do not know what came over me at this point ; my
nerves were no doubt exasperated by this cross-exami-
nation, for it seemed to me that on a sudden my heart
burst ; like a child, I buried my face in my kind aunt’s
lap and cried out, sobbing :

‘No, Aunt, no! You don’t understand. She didn’t
ask me to wait - ’

‘What! Did she refuse you?’ said she, in a tone of
the kindest commiseration, raising my head with her
hand,

‘No - no ” not exactly.’ I shook my head sadly.

‘Are you afraid she doesn’t love you any longer?’

‘Oh, nol I’m not afraid of that.’

‘My poor boy, if you want me to understand, you
must explain a little more clearly.’

I was ashamed and vexed to have given way to my
emotion ; my aunt was doubtless incapable of under-
standing the reasons of my uncertainty ; but if some
special motive lay behind Alissa’s refusal. Aunt
F^licie, by questioning her gently, might perhaps help
me to discover it. She soon reached the same conclusion
for herself.

‘Listen,’ she went on, ‘ AHssa is coming to-morrow
morning to help me decorate the Christmas tree ; I shall
soon see what is at the bottom of it all ; I wpl let you
know at lunch time, and I’m sure you’ll see there’s
nothing to be alarmed about.’

I went to dine at the Bucolins’. Juliette, who had, it
is true, been unwell for the last few days, seemed to me
changed ; her eyes had a farouche^ an almost hard, ex-
pression, which made her more different than ever

5 ^



from her sister. I was not able to speak to either of
them alone that evening ; neither did I wish to, and as
my uncle seemed tired I left soon after dinner.

At the Christmas tree which Aunt Plantier gave
every year, there was always a large gathering of child-
ren, relations, and friends. It was set up in an inner
hall, which contained the staircase and out of which
opened the entrance hall, the drawing-room, and the
glass doors of a kind of winter-garden, where a buffet
had been spread. The decoration of the tree was not
finished, and on the morning of the party, which was
the day after my arrival, AHssa, as my aunt had told me
she would, came round pretty early in order to help her
hang the branches of the tree with ornaments, Hghts,
fruits, sweets, and toys. I should have very much en-
joyed sharing this task with her myself, but I had to let
Aunt Felicie speak to her. I went out, therefore, with-
out seeing her, and spent the whole morning in trying
to while away the anxious hours.

I first went to the Bucolins’, as I wanted to see Juli-
ette. But I heard that Abel had been before me, and
as I was afraid of interrupting a crucial conversation, I
left at once: then I wandered about the quays and
streets till lunch time.

'Great silly 1’ cried my aunt, when I saw her. 'It’s
really inexcusable to make yourself so unhappy for
nothing I There’s not a single word of sense in any-
thing you said to me yesterday. Oh 1 1 didn’t beat about
the bush. I sent Miss Ashburton away as she was tiring
herself out helping us, and as soon as I was alone with
Alissa I asked her straight out why she hadn’t accepted
you last su mm er. Do you suppose she minded? She
wasn’t embarrassed for a single moment, and answered


53



quite calmly that she didn’t want to marry before her
sister. If you had asked her frankly, she would have
said the same thing to you ; a fine thing to make such
a fuss about, isn’t it? You see, my dear, there’s nothing
like frankness. Poor AHssal She spoke to me about her
father, too, whom she can’t leave. Oh! we had a long
talk. Dear child I She’s very sensible ; she told me she
wasn’t perfectly sure yet that she was the right person
for you; that she was afraid she was too old, and
thought that somebody of Juliette’s age . . .’

My aunt went on, but I no longer listened ; there was
only one thing which mattered - Alissa refused to marry
before her sister. But was not Abel there? After aU, in
his egregious conceit he was right ; he was going to
pull off, as he said, both our marriages at one blow.

I hid from my aunt, as best I could, the agitation into
which this revelation, simple as it was, had plunged me,
and showed her nothing but a delight which she
thought very natural, and with which she was all the
more gratified as it seemed that it was through her that
I had obtained it ; but directly after luncheon I left her
with some excuse or other, and hurried off to find
Abel.

‘Ahl what did I tell you?’ said he, embracing me,
as soon as I had confided my good news to him. ‘My
dear fellow, I can tell you already that the conversation
I had with Juliette this morning almost settled it,
though we talked of hardly anything but you. But she
seemed tired - nervous - 1 was afraid of agitating her
by going too far, of over-exdting her if I stayed too
long. But after what you teU me, I hesitate no longer I
I snatch up my hat, dear boy, my stick, and I’m off.
Come with me as far as the Bucolins’ to hang on to my

54



coat-tails, for fear I should fly away on the road ; I feel
lighter than Euphorionl When Juliette knows that it’s
only because of her that her sister has refused you -
when I make my offer on the spot - Ah! my boy, I can
see my father this evening beside the Christmas tree,
praising the Lord and weeping with joy, as he extends
his hands over the two couples kneeling at his feet ;
Miss Ashburton will flutter ofl" in a sigh ; Aunt Plantier
will dissolve into her bodice, and the fiery tree will sing
the glory of God and clap its hands, like the mountains
in the Scriptures.’

It was towards evening that the Christmas tree was
to be lighted, and that the party of children, relations,
and friends was to assemble. Not Icnowing what to do
with myself, sick with anxiety and impatience, after I
had left Abel I started on a long walk over the cliffs, so
as to get over the time of waiting as best I could - lost
my way, and altogether managed so cleverly, that when
I got back to Aunt Plantier’s the party was already in
full swing.

As soon as I got into the hall, I caught sight of
Alissa; she seemed to be waiting for me, and came to-
wards me at once. She was wearing round her neck, in
the opening of her bodice, a little, old, amethyst cross,
which I had given her in memory of my mother, but
which I had never seen her wear before. Her features
were drawn, and the look of suffering on her face smote
my heart.

‘Why are you so late?’ she said rapidly and breath-
lessly. ‘I wanted to speak to you.’

‘I lost my way on the cliffs. . . , But you’re ill. . . . Oh,
Alissa! what is the matter?’

She stood before me a moment, as though she were

55



struck dumb, her Hps trembiing. So sickening a dread
took hold of me that I dared not question her. She put
her hand on my neck, as though to pull my face to-
wards her; I saw she wanted to speak, but at that
moment some guests came in ; disheartened, she let her
hand drop. . . .

‘It is too late,’ she murmured. Then, seeing my eyes
fill with tears, she added in reply to my enquiring look
- as though such a derisory explanation could suffice to
tranquillize me! -

‘No . . . don’t be alarmed; I’ve only a headache, the
children make such a noise ... I had to take refuge here
, . . it’s time to go back to them now.’

She left me abruptly. Some people coming in sepa-
rated me from her. I thought I should be able to rejoin
her in the drawing-room. I caught sight of her at the
other end of the room, surrounded by a troop of child-
ren whose games she was organizing ; between her
and me there were a number of people whom I knew,
and whom I should not have been able to venture past
without running the risk of being stopped. I felt in-
capable of civilities, of conversation ; perhaps if I edged
along the wall ... I tried.

Just as I was going to pass in front of the large glass
doors which led into the garden, I felt my arm seized.
Juliette was there, half hidden in the embrasure, behind
the folds of the curtain.

‘Let’s go into the conservatory,’ she said, hastily.
‘I want to speak to you. Go on by yourself; I’ll join
you there directly.’ Then, half opening the door for a
moment, she slipped into the garden.

What had happened? I wished I could see Abel.
What had he said? What he had done? Returning to

56



the hall, I made my way to the conservatory, where
Juliette was waiting for me.

Her face was flaming, her frowning brows gave her
look an expression of hardness and pain; her eyes
shone as if she were feverish ; even her voice was harsh
and tense. A sort of fury inspired her ; notwithstanding
my anxiety I was astonished - embarrassed almost - by
her beauty. We were alone.

‘Has Alissa spoken to you?’ she asked at once.

‘Barely two words ; I came in very late.’

‘ You know she wants me to marry before she does ?’

‘Yes.’

She looked at me fixedly . . ,

‘And do you know whom she wants me to
marry?’

I did not answer.

‘ You! ’ she went on with a cry.

‘ Why ! it’s madness ! ’

‘Yes ! isn’t it?’ There was both despair and triumph
in her voice. She straightened herself, or rather flung
herself backwards,

‘Now I know what there remains for me to do,’ she
added indistinctly, as she opened the door of the garden
which she slammed violently behind her.

My brain and heart were in a whirl. I felt the blood
throbbing in my temples. One sole idea survived in the
confusion of my spirits - to find Abel ; he, perhaps,
would be able to explain the singular behaviour of the
two sisters. But I dared not go back to the drawing-
room, where I thought everyone would see my agita-
tion. I went out. The icy air of the garden calmed me ;
I stayed in it some time. Evening was falling, and the

57



sea-mist hid the town; there were no leaves on the
trees ; earth and sky seemed, one immense desolation.
The son|id of voices singing rose upon the air; no
doubt it was the choir of children gathered round the
Christmas tree. I went in by the entrance hall. The door
of the drawing-room and inner hall were open ; in the
drawing-room, which was now deserted, I caught sight
of my aunt, where she was sitting, partly concealed by
the piano, talking to Juliette. In the inner hall the
guests were thronging round the lighted tree. The child-
ren had finished their hymn ; there was a silence, and
Pasteur Vautier, standing up in front of the tree, began
a sort of sermon. He never missed an opportunity of
what he called ‘sowing the good seed’. I felt the Hghts
and heat uncomfortably oppressive, and was going out.
Abel was standing beside the door ; he had, no doubt,
been there some time. He was looking at me in a hostile
manner, and when our eyes met he shrugged his shoul-
ders. I went towards him.

‘Fooir he said in a whisper; and then, abruptly,

‘ oh, let’s go out ; I’m fed up with preaching.’

And as soon as we were outside, ‘ You fool 1 ’ he said
again; as I looked at him anxiously, without speaking,
‘Why, it’s you she loves, you fool! Couldn’t you have
told me?’

I was aghast. I tried not to understand.

‘No, of course not! You couldn’t even see it for
yourseifr He had seized me by the arm and was shak-
ing me furiously. His voice between his clenched teeth
hissed and trembled.

‘Abel, I implore you,’ I said after a moment’s silence,
and in a voice which trembled too, while he strode
along at random, dragging me with him. ‘Instead of

58



being so angry, try to tell me what has happened. 1
know nothing.’

He stopped suddenly and scrutinized my face by the
dim light of a street lamp ; then, drawing me quickly to
him, he put his head upon my shoulder and murmured
with a sob :

‘Forgive me! I’m an idiot too, and I didn’t under-
stand any better than you, my poor brother]’

His tears seemed to calm him a little ; he raised his
head, started walking again, and went on :

‘What happened? What’s the use of going over it
again? I had talked to Juliette in the morning, as I told
you. She was extraordinarily beautiful and animated ; I
thought it was because of me, but it was simply because
we were talking of you.’

‘Didn’t you realize it at the time?’

‘No, not exacdy; but now the smallest detail be-
comes clear.’

‘Are you sure you are not making a mistake?*

‘A mistake! My dear fellow, you must be blind not
to see that she’s in love with you.’

‘Then Alissa ...’

‘ Then Alissa is sacrificing herself. She had found out
her sister’s secret, and wanted to give you up to her.
Really, old boy, it’s not very difiicuit to understand] I
wanted to speak to Juliette again ; at my first words, or
rather, as soon as she began to understand me, she got
up from the sofa where she was sitting and repeated
several times over, “ I was sure of it,” in the tone of
voice of a person who was an 3 rthing but sure.’

‘Ohl don’t joke about it.’

‘Why not? I consider it a highly comic affair. She
rushed into her sister’s room; I overheard their voices


59



raised excitedly in a way that alarmed me. I hoped to
see Juliette again, but after a moment it was Alissa who
came. out. She had her hat on, seemed embarrassed at
seeing me, said “How do you do?” to me quickly as
she went out - and that’s ail.’

^Didn’t you see Juliette again?’

Abel hesitated for a little.

‘Yes, After Alissa had gone, I pushed open the door
of the room. Juliette was there motionless, standing in
front of the chitimey-piece, her elbows on the marble,
her chin in her hands ; she was staring at herself in the
glass. When she heard me she didn’t turn round, but
stamped her foot, crying, “Oh, leave me alone 1 ” so
harshly that I went away again without asking for
more. That’s all’

‘And now?’

* Oh I talking to you has done me good. . . . And now?
Weill you had better try and cure Juliette of her love,
for, either I don’t know Alissa, or else she won’t have
you before you do.’

We walked on for some time silently.

‘ Let’s go back,’ said he at last. ‘ The guests must have
gone by now. I’m afraid my father will be waiting for
me.'

We went in. The drawing-room was, in fact, empty ;
and in the hall round the tree, whose branches had
been stripped and whose lights had been nearly ail ex-
tinguished, ihere remained only my aunt and two of her
children, Uncle BucoHn, Miss Ashburton, the pastor,
my cousins, and a rather ridicuious-lookiug individual,
whom I had noticed talking for a long time to my aunt,
but whom I only at that moment recognised as the
6o



suitor Juliette had spoken to me about. Taller, stronger,
more highly coloured than any o£ us, almost bald, of a
different class, a different world, a different race, he
seemed to realize that he was a stranger among us ; he
wore an immense moustache and a grizzled imperial,
which he was nervously twisting and tugging.

The entrance hall, the doors of which had been left
open, was not lighted ; we had come in noiselessly, and
no one noticed our presence. A frightful foreboding
shot through me.

' Stop !’ said Abel, seizing me by the arm.

Then we saw the stranger draw near Juliette, and
take the hand which she abandoned to him without
resistance, without giving him a glance. Night shut
down upon my heart.

‘ Oh, Abell What is happening ?’ I whispered, as if I
did not understand yet, or hoped I did not understand
aright.

‘By Jove I the young one is going one better,’ he
said in a hissing voice. ‘ She doesn’t want to be outdone
by her sister. The angels are applauding in Heaven, and
no mistake r

My uncle went up to embrace Juliette, whom Miss
Ashburton and my aunt were pressing round. Pasteur
Vautier drew near. I took a step forward. Alissa caught
sight of me, ran up to me in a quiver of emotion.

‘Oh, Jerome 1 It mustn’t be. She doesn’t love himl
Why, she told me so only this very morniagi Try to
prevent it, Jerome 1 Oh! what will become of her?’

She hung upon my shoulder with desperate entreaty.
I would have given my life to lessen her anguish.

Suddenly there came a cry jErom near the tree, a
confused stir. We rushed up. Juliette had fallen

6i



unconscious into my aunt’s arms. They were all crowd-
ing round, hanging over her, so that I could hardly see
her ; her face, wHch had turned frightfuUy pale, looked
as though it were being dragged backwards by the
weight of her loosened hair. It seemed, from the con-
vulsive movements of her body, that this was no
ordinary faint.

‘No, no!' said my aunt aloud, in order to reassure
Uncle Bucolin, who was getting agitated, and whom
Pasteur Vautier was already consoling, with his fore-
finger pointed heavenwards. ‘No, it's nothing. The
effect of emotion. Just a nervous attack. Monsieur
Tcissi^es, please help me, you're so strong. We will
carry her up to my room, on to my bed, on to my bed. '
Then she stooped towards the elder of her sons, whis-
pered something in his ear, and I saw him go off at
once, no doubt to fetch a doctor.

My aunt and the stranger were supporting Juliette's
shoulders, as she lay, half recHning, in their arms.
Alissa raised her sister’s feet and embraced them ten-
derly. Abel held up her head, which would have fallen
backwards, and I saw him bend down and cover with
kisses her floating hair, as he gathered it together.

Outside the door of the room I stopped. Juliette was
laid on the bed ; Alissa said a few words to M. Tcis-
si^res and to Abel, which I could not hear; she accom-
panied them to the door and begged us to leave her
sister to rest ; she wished to remain alone with her, with
no one else but Aunt Plantier. Abel caught hold of
my arm and dragged me out of doors, into the night,
and there we walked on and on for a long time, without
purpose, without courage, without reflexion.

6z



CHAPTER FIVE


I SEEMED to have no other reason for living than my
love, and to that I clung, expecting nothing, and with
my mind made up to expect nothing, but what should
come to me from Alissa.

The next morning, as I was getting ready to go and
see her, my aunt handed me the following letter which
she had just received :

Juliette’s extreme resdessness did not yield to the
doctor’s prescriptions till towards morning. I beg Jerome
not to come and see us for some days. Juliette might recog-
nize his footsteps or his voice, and she is in need of the
greatest quiet.

* I am afraid Juliette’s condition will keep me here. If I do
not manage to sec Jerome before he leaves, please tell him,
dear Aunt, that I will write to him. . .

The Bucolins’ door was shut only against me. My
aunt, or anyone else that chose, was free to knock at it ;
and, indeed, my aunt was going there that very morn-
ing. I noight make a noise! What a feeble excuse! No
matter.

‘Very well,’ said I, ‘I won’t go.’

It cost me a great deal not to see AHssa again at once,
and yet I was afraid of seeing her, I was afraid she
might hold me responsible for her sister’s condition,
and it was easier to bear not seeing her again than
seeing her vexed.

At any rate, I determined I would see Abel.

At his door, the maid gave me a note :

‘ I am leaving you this word or two so that you mayn’t be
63



anxious.The idea of staying at Le Havre, so near Juliette, was
intolerable. I embarked for Southampton last night, almost
directly after I left you. I shall spend the rest of the holidays
with S — in London. We shall meet again at the School.*

All human help failed me at one and the same time.
I did not prolong a stay which could only prove painful
to me, and went back to Paris before the beginning of
the term. It was to God that I turned my looks, to Him
‘from whom cometh down all true consolation and
every good gift.’ It was to Him that I offered my
trouble. I thought that Alissa, too, was taking refuge
in Him, and the thought that she was praying en-
couraged and exalted my prayers.

There went by a long period of meditation and study
with no other events but Alissa’s letters to me and
mine to her. I have kept all her letters ; by their help
I can, from this time onwards, check my recollections
when they become confused.

I had news of Le Havre from my aunt, and at first
only from her ; I learnt through her what anxiety Ju-
liette’s unhappy condition had caused for the first few
days. Twelve days after I had left I at last received this
letter from Alissa :

* Forgive me, my dear Jerome, for not having written to
you sooner. Our poor Juliette’s state has allowed me very
little time. Since you went away, I have hardly left her. I
begged Aunt to give you news of us, and I suppose she has
done so. So you know that Juliette has been better for the
last three days. I already thank God, but I dare not feel
happy yet.’

Robert also, of whom I have so far told you very
little, was able to give me news of his sisters, when he
returned to Paris a few days after me. For their sake, I
64



spent more time with him than my disposition wouid
have naturally inclined me to ; whenever the School of
Agriculture, where he was studying, left Mm free, I
took Mm in charge and was at great pains to amuse Mm.

It was through Mm that I learnt - what I had not
dared ask either Alissa or my aunt -■ that fidouard Teis-
sieres had come to enquire for Juliette very assidu-
ously, but when Robert had left Le Havre she had not
yet seen Mm. I learnt also that Juliette had kept up an
obstinate silence towards her sister, wMch nothing had
been able to break down.

Then I learnt from my aunt a little later that Juliette
insisted on her engagement being made pubHc, in spite
of what I instinctively felt was Alissa’s hope that it
would be broken off at once. Advice, injunctions, en-
treaties, spent themselves in vain against tMs deter-
mination of Juliette’s, wMch seemed fixed like a bar
across her brow and like a bandage over her eyes -
wMch seemed to immure her in sEence.

Time passed. I received from Alissa - to whom, in-
deed, I knew not what to write - notMng but the most
elusive notes. The tMck fogs of winter wrapped me
round ; my study lamp and all the fervour of my love
and faith served but ill, alas I to keep the darkness and
the cold from my heart.

Time passed. Then, one morning of sudden spring,
came a letter from Alissa to my aunt, who was absent
from Le Havre, a letter wMch my aunt sent on to me
and from which I copy out the part that throws Hght
on my story.

* Admire my dodUty. As you advised, I have seen M.
Teissites and talked to him at length. I confess that Ms
behaviour has been perfect, and I have almost, I admit.



come to the point of believing that the marriage may not
turn out so badly as I feared at first. Certainly Juliette does
not love him; but he seems to me every week to be less un-
worthy of her love. He speaks of the situation with great
clear-sightedness and makes no mistake as to my sister’s
character; but he has great faith in the efficacy of his own
love, and flatters himself that there is nothing his constancy
will not be able to overcome. That is to say, he is very much
in love.

* Yes 1 1 am extremely touched to see Jerome take so much
trouble over my brother. I imagine that he does so only out
of a sense of duty, for Robert’s character is very different
from his - perhaps, too, in order to please me - but doubt-
less he has already come to understand that the more ardu-
ous the duty one assumes, the more it educates and uplifts
the soul. You will think these very lofty reflexions, but do
not laugh at your foolish niece too much, for it is these
thoughts which give me support and which help me to try
and look upon Juliette’s marriage as a good thing.

*Dear aunt, your affectionate solicitude is very precious to
me. But do not thinlr I am unhappy, I might almost say
the contrary is the case, for the trid through which Juliette
has just gone has had its effect on me too. Those words of
Scripture which I used to repeat without very well under-
standing them, have suddenly become clear to me : ‘‘Cursed
be the man that trusteth in man.” Long before coming
across them in my Bible, I had read them on a little Christ-
mas card which Jerome sent me when he was not quite
twelve years old and when I was just fourteen. Beside the
bunch of flowers which was painted on it, and which we
then thought lovely, there were these lines, from a para-
phrase of Corneille’s :

'Quel charme vainqueur du monde
Vers Dieu m’dleve aujourd’hui?

Malheureux Fhonxtne qui fonde
Sur les hommes son appui.

66



‘ I confess I infinitely prefer the simple text out of Jere-
miah. No doubt, Jerome chose the card at the time without
paying much attention to the lines. But if I am to judge
from his letters, his frame of mind at present is not unlike
mine, and every day I thank God that He should have
brought us both nearer to Him with one and the same
stroke.

‘ I have not forgotten our conversation, and I am not
writing to him as much as I used to do, so as not to disturb
him in his work. You will no doubt think that I make up
for it by talking about him all the more ; lest I should go on
too long, I will end my letter at once. Don’t scold me too
much this time.’

What reflexions this letter aroused in me 1 1 cursed
my aunt’s meddling interference (what was the conver-
sation to which Aiissa alluded, and which was the cause
of her silence?) and the clumsy good-nature which made
her send the letter on to me. It was already hard enough
for me to bear Alissa’s silence, and ohl would it not
have been better a thousand times to have left me in
ignorance that she was writing to another person what
she no longer cared to say to me? Everything in the
letter irritated me ; to hear her speak to my aunt so
easily of our little private ajSFairs, as weU as the natural-
ness of her tone, her composure, her seriousness, her
pleasantry.

‘No, no, my dear fellow 1 Nothing in the letter irri-
tates you, except the fact that it isn’t addressed to you,’
said Abel, who was my daily companion; for Abel was
the only person to whom I could speak, and in my
loneliness I was constantly drawn to him afresh by
weakness, by a wistful longing for sympathy, by diffi-
dence, and, when I was at fault, by my belief in his

67



advice, in spite of the difference of onr natures - or
rather, because of it.

'Let us study this paper/ said he, spreading the letter
out on his writing-table.

Three nights had already passed over my vexation ;
for four days I had managed to keep it to myself 1 1 led
up almost naturally to a point when Abel said to me:

'We’ll consign the Juliette-Teissi^res affair to the fire
of love - eh? We know what that flame is worth. Upon
my word, Teissi^res seems just the kind of moth to
singe his wings in it.’

‘That will do!’ said I, for his banter was very dis-
tasteful to me. 'Let’s go on to the rest.’

‘The rest,’ he said. ‘The rest is all for you. You
haven’t much to complain of. Not a line, not a word,
that isn’t filled with the thought of you. You may say
the whole letter is addressed to you ; when Aunt F61icie
sent it on to you, she merely sent it to its rightful
owner ; Alissa writes to the good lady as a make-shift,
in default of you. What can Corneille’s lines (which, by
the way, are by Racine) matter to your aunt? I tell you
it’s to you she is talking ; she’s saying it ah to you.
You’re nothing but a simpleton if a fortnight hence
your cousin isn’t writing to you just as lengthily, as
easily, as agreeably ...’

‘ She doesn’t seem to be taking the right road!’

'It only depends upon you for her to take it! Do you
want my advice? Don’t say a word for ever so long, of
love or marriage ; don’t you see that since her sister’s
misfortune, it’s that she’s set against? Harp on the fra-
ternal string and talk to her untiringly of Robert -
since you have the patience to look after the young ass.
Just go on amusing her intelligence; all the rest will



follow. Ah! if it were only I who had to write to
herr

‘You aren’t worthy to love her.’

Nevertheless, I followed Abel’s advice ;• and, indeed,
Alissa’s letters soon began to get more animated ; but I
could not hope for any real joy on her part, or that she
would let herself go without reserve, until Juliette’s
situation, if not her happiness, was assured.

The news which Alissa gave me of her sister im-
proved, however. Her marriage was to take place in
July ; Alissa wrote to me that she supposed that at this
date Abel and I would be engaged in our studies. I
understood that she judged it better for us not to ap-
pear at the ceremony, so we alleged some examination
or other, and contented ourselves with sending our
good wishes.

About a fortnight after the marriage this is what
Alissa wrote to me :

‘ My dear Jerome,

‘Imagine my astonishment yesterday when, on opening at
random the charming Racine you gave me, I found the four
lines which are on your little old Christmas card that I have
kept in my Bible for the last ten years :

‘Quel charme vainqueur du monde
Vers Dieu m''616ve aujourd’hui?

Malheureux Thomme qui fonde
Sur les hommes son appuil

T had thought they came £f om a paraphrase of Corneille’s,
and I a dmi t I didn’t think much of them. But as I went on
reading the fourth Cantiqm Spirituel, I came across some
verses which are so beautiful, that I cannot resist copying
them. No doubt you know them already, if I am to judge
from the indiscreet initials which you have put in the
margin of the book.’ pt is true that I had taken the habit of
69



sprinkling my books and Alissa’s with the first letter of her
name, opposite all the passages wliich I liked and which I
wanted her to know.] ‘Never mind! I write them out for my
own pleasure. I was a iitde vexed at first to see that you had
pointed out what I thought was a discovery of my own,
but this naughty feeling soon gave way to my pleasure in
thinking that you like them as much as I do. As I copy I
feel as if I were reading them over with you.

‘De la sagesse immortelle
La voix tonne et nous instruit.

Enfants des hommes, dit-elle,

De VOS soins quel est le fruit?

Par quelle erreur, 3mes vaines,

Du plus pur sang de vos veines
Achetex-vous si souvent,

Non un pain qui vous repaisse,

Mais une ombre qui vous laisse
Plus affames que devant?

‘Le pain que je vous propose
Sert aux anges d’aliment :

Dieu lui-mcme le compose.

De la fleur de son froment.

Cest ce pain si ddlectable
Que ne sert point k sa table
Le monde que vous suivex.

Je Toffre k qui veut me suivre.

Approchex. Voulex-vous vivre?

Prenex, mangex et vivex.

‘ L^dme heureusement captive
Sous ton joug trouve la paix,

Et s’abreuve d’une eau vive
Qui ne s^dpuise jamais.

Chacun peut boire en cette onde :

EUe invite tout le monde ;

Mais nous courons foUement
Chercher des sources bourbeuses
Ou des citemes trompeuses
D’oh Peau fuit k tout moment.


70



‘ How beautiful I Jerome, how beautiful I Do you really
think it as beautiful as I do? A little note in my edition says
that Mme de Maintenon, when she heard Mile d’Aumalc
sing this hymn, seemed struck with admiration, “dropped
a few tears”, and made her repeat a part of the piece over
again. I know it by heart now, and never weary of saying
it to myself. My only regret is that I haven’t heard you
read it.

‘The news from our travellers continues to be very good.
You know already how much Juliette enjoyed Bayonne and
Biarritz in spite of the fearful heat. Since then they have
visited Fontarrabia, stayed at Burgos and crossed the
Pyrenees twice. Now she writes me an enthusiastic letter
from Montserrat, They think of spending ten days longer
at Barcelona before they return to Nimes, where Jfidouard
wants to be back before September, so as to be able to look
after the vintage.

‘Father and I have been settled at Fongueusemare for a
week now, and we expect Miss Ashburton and Robert in
four days’ time. You know the poor boy has failed in his
examination; not that it was difficult, but the examiner
a^ked him such peculiar questions that it confused him ; I
cannot believe, after what you told me about his keenness
for work, that he hadn’t prepared properly, but this ex-
aminer, it appears, takes a pleasure in putting people out.

‘As for your successes, my dear, I can hardly say that
I congratulate you. I have so much confidence in you,
Jerome 1 Whenever I think of you, my heart fills with hope.
Will you be able to begin the work you speak about at
once?

‘Nothing is changed here in the garden; but the house
seems very empty I You will have understood ■- won’t you?
- why I asked you not to come this year. I feel it is better
so ; I tell myself so evfery day, for it is hard to stay so long

71



without seeing you. Sometimes I look for you involun-
tarily ; I stop in the middle of what I am reading, I turn my
head quickly ... it seems as though you were there!

‘I continue my letter. It is night, everybody is asleep ; I am
sitting up late writing to you, before the open window. The
garden is full of scents ; the air is warm. Do you remember
when we were children, whenever we saw or heard any-
thing very beautiful, we used to say to ourselves, “Thanks,
Lord, for having created it.” To-night I said to myself with
my whole soul, “Thanks, Lord, for having made the night
so beautiful!” And suddenly I wanted you there - 1 felt you
there, close to me - with such violence that perhaps you
felt it.

*Yes, you were right in your letter when you said, “In
generous hearts admiration is lost in gratitude.” How
many other things I should like to write to you! I think of
the radiant land Juliette speaks of. I think of other lands,
vaster, more radiant stiU, more desert-like. A strange con-
viction dwells in me that one day - but I cannot tell how -
you and I will see together some great mysterious land - but
ah! I cannot tell which ...*

No doubt you can easily imagine with what trans-
ports of joy I read this letter, with what sobs of love!
Other letters followed. Alissa, it is true, thanked me for
not coming to Fongueusemare ; it is true she begged
me not to try to see her again this year, but she re-
gretted my absence, she wanted me ; from page to page
there sounded the same appeal. Where did I find
strength to resist it? In AbePs advice, no doubt, and
in the fear of suddenly ruining my joy, and in an in-
stinctive stiffening of my will against the inclinations
of my heart.

From the letters which followed I copy all that bears
upon my tale :



* Dear Jerome^

* My heart melts with joy as I read you. I was just going
to answer your letter from Orvieto, when the one from
Perugia and the one from Assisi arrived together. My mind
has turned traveller ; it is only my body that makes believe
to stay behind here; in truth I am with you on the white
roads of Umbria. I set out with you in the morning and
watch the dawn with a fresh-created eye. . . . Did you really
call me on the terrace of Cortona? I heard you. We were
terribly thirsty on the hills above Assisi, but how good I
thought the Franciscan’s glass of water! Oh, my friend! It
is through you that I look at all things. How much I like
what you write about St. Francis 1 Yes, what we should
seek for is indeed - is it not ? - an exaltation and not an
emancipation of the mind. The latter goes only with an
abominable pride. Our ambition should lie not in revolt
but in service.

‘The news from Nimes is so good, that it seems to me I
have God’s permission to give way to joy. The only shadow
this summer is my poor father’s condition. In spite of all my
care he still keeps sad, or rather he relapses into sadness the
moment I leave liim to himself, and it becomes less and less
easy to get him out of it. All the joys of nature that are
about us speak a language which has become foreign to
him; he no longer even makes any ejEfort to understand it.
Miss Ashburton is well. I read your letters aloud to them
both ; each one gives us enough to talk about for three days,
and then comes a fresh one.

‘ Robert left us the day before yesterday. He is going to
spend the rest of his holidays with his friend R — , whose
father is at the head of a model farm. Certainly the life we
lead here is not very amusing for him. I could only en-
courage him in his idea when he spoke of leaving.

*. . . I have so much to say to you. I thirst for a talk, such
an endless talk I Sometimes I can find no words, no distinct
ideas - this evening I am writing as in a dream - and I all

73



realize is an almost oppressive sense of infinite riches to
bestow and to receive.

* How did we manage to be silent during so many long
months? No doubt we were hibernating. Oh! may that
frightful winter of our silence be for ever past! Now that
I have found you again, life, thought, our souls “ every-
thing seems beautiful, adorable, inexhaustibly fertile.

*i2th September.

‘ I have got your letter from Pisa. The weather is splendid
here, too. Never before have I thought Normandy so beau-
tiful. The day before yesterday I took an enormously long
walk, going across country at random. When I came in I
was not so much tired as excited, almost intoxicated with
sun and joy. How beautiful the haystacks were in the burn-
ing sun! There was no need to imagine myself in Italy for
me to think everything I saw wonderful.

‘Yes, dear friend, it is as you say, an exhortation to joy
which I hear and understand in Nature’s “mingled hymn”.
I hear it in every bird’s song; I breathe it in the scent of
every flower, and I have reached the point of conceiving
adoration as the only form of prayer, repeating over and
over again with St. Francis : “My God I My God I e non alW*
- and nothing else - my heart filled with mxpressihk love.

‘ Don’t be afraid, though, of my becoming an ignoramus.
I have been reading a great deal lately; with the help of a
few rainy days I have, as it were, folded my adoration up
into my books. Finished Malebranche and began at once
on Leibnitz’ Letters fo Clarke, Then, as a rest, read Shelley’s
Cenci - without pleasure ; read Lbe Sensitive "Plant too. I shall
make you very indignant, but I would give nearly all Shelley
and all Byron for Keats’ four odes, which we read together
last summer; just as I would give all Hugo for a few of

74



Baudelaire’s sonnets. The words ‘‘great poet” have no mean-
ing - what is important is to be a pure poet. Oh, my brother I
thank you for having taught me to understand and love
these things.

‘ No, don’t cut short your journey for the sake of a few
days’ meeting. Seriously, it is better that we should not sec
each other again just yet. Believe me, if you were with me
I could not think of you more. I should be sorry to give you
pain, but I have come to the point of no longer wanting
your presence - now. Shall I confess ? If I knew you were
coming this evening I should fly away.

‘Oh! don’t ask me to explain this feeling, please, I only
know that I think of you unceasingly (which ought to be
enough iotyour happiness) and that I am happy so.’

*

A short time after this last letter, and immediately
after my return from Italy, I was called up for my
military service and sent to Nancy. I did not know a
living soul there, but I was glad to be alone, for it was
thus more clearly apparent to my lover’s pride and to
Alissa herself, that her letters were my only refuge, and
that the thought of her was, as Ronsard would have
said, ‘my only entelechy’.

To tell the truth I bore the pretty severe discipline to
which we were subjected very cheerily. I stiffened my-
self to endurance, and in my letters to Alissa com-
plained only of absence. We even found in this long
separation a trial worthy of our valour. ‘You who
never complain,’ wrote Alissa: ‘you whom I cannot
imagine faltering.’ What would I not have endured to
prove the truth of her words?

Almost a year had gone by since our last meeting.


75



She seemed not to consider this, but to count her time
of waiting only from now onwards. I reproached her
with it,

‘Was I not with you in Italy?’ she replied. ‘Ungrateful I
I never left you for a single day. You must understand
that now, for a time, I can’t follow you any longer, and
it is that, only that, which I call separation. I try hard, it
is true, to imagine you as a soldier. I can’t succeed. At
best I see you in the evening in your little room in the
Rue Gambetta, writing or reading - but no, not even that !
In reality it is only at Fonguesemare or Le Havre that I
can see you, in a year from now.

*A year ! I don’t count the days that have already gone
by, my hope fastens its gaze on that point in the future,
which is slowly, slowly, drawing nearer. Do you remember
the low wall that shelters the chrysanthemums, at the end
of the garden, ynd how sometimes we used to venture
along the top of it ? Juliette and you walked on it as boldly
as though you were Mussulmans going straight to Paradise ;
as for me, I was sei2ed with giddiness after the first step
or two, and you used to call to me from below, “ Don’t
look at your feet! Eyes front! Don’t stop! Look at the
goal I ” And then, at last - and it was more of a help than
your words ~ you would climb on to the wall at the other
end and wait for me. Then I no longer trembled ; I no
longer felt giddy; I no longer saw anything but you; I
ran until I reached your open arms.

‘Without faith in you, Jerome, what would become of
me ? I have need to feel you strong; need to lean on you.
Don’t weaken.’

Out of a sort of spirit of defiance, which made us
deliberately prolong our time of waiting - out of fear,
too, of an unsatisfactory meeting - we agreed that I

76



' K° ”1 •" ■“

February: ™ddle of

reality. I wasn’t abk tlT • its

to me so ridiculous that?tat°“f f’

•Ban; I was. in fact, on the pS .o'“ “ ‘° *T
any other book, no matter what- F ^ ’^ith

Waniomess was set out for customers n°^*'l!' *

Uoohacopyandputdownmymoney^^^^^^^^^

think that AKpI Ak»i tr • - but shame to

■e™ uirf' ,hid. 4, r»;„„i4,i,° S^t

“• of Le Havre, where Abeliroto

mentioned, people say that the book is very suc« sW^
hear his incurable futihty of mind called “hghtn“s’^Ld
“grace”; of course, I keep prudently silent, aid We S
no one but you that I have read it. Poor Pasteur V^uW
who at first looked deeply grieved - and very rightly - k
now ^ginning to wonder whether, instead, he hafn’tLse
to feel proud; and all his acquaintance are doing their be t
to persuade him so. Yesterday, at Aunt Planler’s, whi
Mme V- said to him abruptly : -‘You must be very happy
Pasteur, over your son’s wondet&l successi” he aLwS’
rather abashed, “Oh 1 1 haven’t got as fer as that yeti ” « But

77



vou Willi Butyou will!” said Aunt, imocently no doubt, but
L an encouraging voice that everyone began to laugh,

will it be when Tk Ne»’ Abelard is brought out ?
I hear it is going to be acted at some theatre or other on &e
Boulevards, and that the papers are beginning to talk of it
already! Poor Abell Is that really the success he wants.

Will he be satisfied with that? ^ , ■,

‘Yesterday in the Interior Cmolation I read these words :
“All human glory, indeed all temporal honour, all worldly
grandeur, compared with Thy eternd glory is vamty ^d
foolishn^ And I thought, “Oh, God! I ttak Thee that

Thouhast chosen Jerome for Thy celesaal glory, compared

with which the other is vanity and foohshness.


The weeks and months went by in monotonous oc-
cupations ; but as there was nothing on which I could
fasmn my thoughts but memories or hopes, I hardly
noticed how slow the time was, how long the hours.

My uncle and Alissa were to go in June to the neigh-
bourhood of Nimes on a visit to Juliette, who was ex-
pecting her baby about that time. Less favourable news
of her health made them hasten their departure.


‘Your last letter, addressed to Lc Havre’ [wrote AHssa],
‘arrived after we had left. I cannot explain by what acadent
it reached me here only a week later. During all that week
I went about with a soul that was only half a soul, a shiver-
ing, pitiful, beggarly soul. Oh, my brotherl I am only truly
myself - more than myself - when I am with you.

‘Juliette is better again. We are daily expecting her con-
finement, without undue anxiety. She knows that^ I am
writing to you this morning. The day after our arrival at
Aigues-Vives, she said to me: “And Jerome? What has
become of him? Does he write to you still?” And as I
couldn’t but teU her the truth: “When you write to him,”


78



she said, “tell him that ...” she hesitated a moment, and
then, smiling very sweetly, went on : “that I am cured.” I
was rather afraid that in her letters, which are always so
gay, she might be acting a part and taking herself in by it
The things she makes her happiness out of nowadays are
so different from the things she had dreamt of, the things
on which it seemed her happiness ought to have depended I
... Ah I this, that we call happiness, how intimate a part o£
the soul it is, and of what little importance are the outside
elements which seem to go to its making I I spare you all
the reflexions I make during my walks along the garrigm,
when what astonishes me most is that I don’t feel happier;
Juliette’s happiness ought to fill me with joy ... why does
my heart give way to an incomprehensible melancholy
against which I am unable to fight ? The very beauty of the
country, which I feel, which at any rate I recognize, adds
still further to this inexplicable sadness. When you wrote to
me from Italy, I was able to see everything through you;
now I feel as if I were depriving you of whatever I look at
without you. And then at Fongueusemarc or at Le Havre
I had made myself a kind of rough-weather virtue, for use
on rainy days ; here, this virtue seems out of place, and I
feel uneasily that there is no occasion for it. The laughter of
the people and of the country jars upon me; perhaps what I
call being sad is simply not being so noisy as they. No doubt
there was some pride in my joy formerly, for at present, in
the midst of this alien gaiety, what I feel is not unlike
humiliation.

‘ I have scarcely been able to pray since I have been here :
I have the childish feeling that God is no longer in the
same place. Good-bye; I must stop now. I am ashamed of
this blasphemy, and of my weakness, and of my sadness, and
of confessing them, and of writing you aU this which I
should tear up to-morrow if it were not posted to-night. . .*

The next letter spoke only of the birth of her niece,
79



whose godmother she was to be, of Juliette’s joy and
of my uncle’s, but of her own feelings there was no
further question.

Then there were letters dated from Fongueusemare
again, where Juliette came to stay with her in July.

‘fidouard and Juliette left us this morning. It is my litdc
niece whom I regret most; when I see her again in sk
months’ time I shall no longer recognke every one of her
movements ; she had scarcely one which I hadn’t seen her
invent. Growth is always so mysterious and surprising; it
is through failure of attention that we are not oftener as-
tonished at it. How many hours I have spent, bending over
the little cradle, where so many hopes lie centred. By what
selfishness, by what conceit, by what lack of desire for im-
provement is it that development ceases so soon, and that
every creature becomes definitive, when still so far from
God? Oh! if we could, if we would but approach nearer
to Him ... think, what emulation I

‘Juliette seems very happy. I was grieved at first to find
that she had given up her piano and her reading, but
jfidouard Teissieres doesn’t like music and hasn’t much
taste for books ; no doubt Juliette is acting wisely in not
seeking her pleasure where he cannot follow her. On the
other hand, she takes an interest in her husband’s occupa-
tions and he tells her all about his business. It has developed
greatly this year; it pleases him to say that it is because of
his marriage, which has brought him an important dkntek
at Le Havre. Robert accompanied him the last time he went
on a business journey, ifidouard is very kind to him, declares
he understands his character and doesn’t despair of seeing
him take seriously to this kind of work.

‘ Father is much better ; the sight of his daughter’s happi-
ness has made him young again; he is interesting himself
again in the farm and the garden, and has just asked me to
go on with our reading aloud, which we had begun with

8o



Miss Ashburton and which was interrupted by the Teis-
sieres’ visit. I am reading them Baron Hiibnefs travels, and
enjoy them very much myself. I shall have more time
for my own reading too ; but I want some advice from you;
this morning I took up several books, one after the other,
without feeling a taste for any of them! ’

Alissa’s letters, henceforward, became more troubled,
more pressing.

‘The fear of troubling you prevents me from telling you
how much I want you,’ [she wrote towards the end of the
summer]. ‘ Every day that has to be got through before I
see you again weighs on me, oppresses me. Another two
months. It seems longer than all the rest of the time which
has already gone by without you! Everything I take up to
while away the hours, seems nothing but an absurd stop-
gap, and I cannot set myself to anything. My books are
without virtue and without charm ; my walks have no attrac-
tion ; Nature has lost her glamour ; the garden is emptied of
colour, of scent.

*I envy you your fatigue-parties and your compulsory
drills which are constandy dragging you out of yourself,
tiring you, hurrying along your days, and, at night, jSinging
you, wearied out, to your sleep. The stirring description
you gave me of the manoeuvres haunts me. For the last few
nights I have been sleeping badly, and several times I have
been awakened with a start by the bugles sounding reveille
... I actually heard them. I can so well imagine the intoxica-
tion of which you speak, the morning rapture, the light-
headedness almost . . . How beautiful the plateau of Malze-
ville must have been in the icy radiance of dawn!

‘This is my last letter, my friend. However uncertain the
date of your return may be, it cannot be delayed much
longer. I shall not be able to write to you any more. I
should have preferred our meeting to have been at Fon-
gueusemare, but the weather has broken; it is very cold,

S.G. — 4 8i



and father talks of nothing but going back to town. Now
that Juliette and Robert are no longer with us we could
easily take you in, but it is better that you should go to
Aunt Felicie, who will be glad, too, to have you.

‘As the day of our meeting comes near, I look forward to
it with growing anxiety, almost with apprehension. I seem
now to dread your coming that I so longed for; I try not
to think of it ; I imagine your ring at the bell, your step on
the stairs, and my heart stops beating or hurts me. . . . And
whatever you do, don’t expect me to be able to speak to you.
I feel my past comes to an end here ; I see nothing beyond ;
my life stops.

Four days later, however - a week, that is, before I
was liberated from my military service - 1 received one
more letter, a very short one:

‘ My friend, I entirely approve of your not wanting to
prolong beyond measure your stay at Le Havre and the
time of our first meeting. What should we have to say to
each other that we have not already written? So if the busi-
ness connected with your examination calls you to Paris as
early as the 28th, don’t hesitate, don’t even regret that you
are not able to give us more than two days. Shall we not
have aU our lives? ’


8 a



CHAPTER SIX


It was at Aunt Plantier’s that our first meeting took
place, I suddenly felt that my military service had made
me heavy and clumsy. . . . Later on I thought she must
have found me altered. But why should this first de-
ceptive impression have had any importance for us
two? As for me, I was so much afraid of not recogniz-
ing the Alissa I knew, that at first I hardly dared look
at her. No I what was really embarrassing was the ab-
surd position of being engaged which they ah forced
upon us, and everybody’s anxiety to leave us alone and
hurry away when we were there I

‘ Oh, Aunt I you are not the least in the way ; we have
nothing private to say to each other,’ cried Alissa at
last, impatient at the tactless manner in which the ex-
cellent woman tried to eflFace herself.

‘ Yes, yes I my dears. I quite understand. When young
people haven’t seen each other for a long time, they
always have lots of little things to tell each other.’

* Please, Aunt I You really wiU annoy us if you go
awayl’ and this was said in a tone which was almost
angry, and in which I hardly recognized Alissa’s
voice.

‘Aunt I I assure you that if you go away, we shan’t
utter a single other word I’ added I, laughing, but my-
self filled with a certain apprehension at the idea of our
being left alone. And then, with sham cheerfulness, we
aH three set to work to make conversation, trying to
hide our embarrassment beneath the forced liveliness

83



of our commonplace talk. We were to meet again the
next day, as my uncle had invited me to lunch, so that
we parted that evening without regret, glad to put an
end to this absurd scene.

I arrived long before luncheon-time, but I found
Alissa talking to a girl ftiend, whom she had not the
strength of mind to send away, and who was not dis-
creet enough to go. When at last she left us, I pretended
to be surprised that Alissa had not kept her to lunch.
We were both of us in a state of nervous tension and
tired by a sleepless night. My uncle appeared. Alissa
felt that I thought him aged. He had grown rather deaf,
and heard my voice with diflBculty ; the necessity I was
under of shouting so as to make myself understood
made my talk dull and stupid.

After lunch Aunt Plantier, as had been arranged,
came to take us out in her carriage ; she drove us to
Orcher, with the idea of letting Alissa and me do the
pleasantest part of the journey on foot.

The weather was hot for the time of the year. The
part of the hill up which we had to walk was exposed
to the sun and unattractive ; the leafless trees gave us no
shelter. In our anxiety to rejoin the carriage in which
our aunt was to wait for us, we hastened our pace un-
comfortably. My head was aching so badly that I could
not extract a single idea from it; to keep myself in
countenance, or because I thought that the gesture
might serve instead of words, I had taken AHssa’s hand,
which she let me keep. Our emotion, the rapidity of
our walk, and the awkwardness of our silence, sent
the blood to our faces ; I felt my temples throbbing ;
AJissa’s colour was unpleasantly heightened; and soon
the discomfort of feeling the contact of our darnp hands

H



made us unclasp them and let them drop sadly to our
sides.

We had made too much haste, and arrived at the
cross-roads long before the carriage, which had taken
another road and driven very slowly, because of my
aunt’s desire to leave us plenty of time for talking. We
sat down on the bank at the side of the road ; a cold
wind, which suddenly got up, chilled us to the bone,
for we were bathed in perspiration ; then we walked on
to meet the carriage. But the worst was again the press-
ing solicitude of our poor aunt, who was convinced
that we had had a long and satisfactory talk and was
longing to question us about our engagement. Alissa,
unable to bear it, and with her eyes full of tears, alleged
a violent headache, and we drove home in silence.

The next day I woke up with aching limbs and a bad
chill, so unwell that I put off going to the Bucolins’ till
the afternoon. By ill luck, Alissa was not alone. Made-
leine Plantier, one of Aunt Felicie’s granddaughters,
was there. I knew Alissa liked talking to her. She was
staying with her grandmother for a few days, and when
I came in, she exclaimed ;

^If you are going back to the Cote when you leave
here, we might as well go together.’

I agreed mechanically; so that I was unable to sec
Alissa alone. But the presence of this charming girl
was, no doubt, a help to us ; I no longer felt the in-
tolerable embarrassment of the day before ; the con-
versation between the three of us was soon going
smoothly, and was less futile than I had at first feared.
Alissa smiled strangely when I said good-bye to her ;
I had the impression that she had not understood till
that moment that I was going away the next morning.

85



But the prospect of my speedy return took away any
touch of tragedy from my good-bye.

After dinner, however, prompted by a vague un-
easiness, I went down to the town, where I wandered
about for nearly an hour before I made up my mind to
ring at the BucoHns’ door. It was my uncle who re-
ceived me. Aiissa, who was not feeling very well, had
already gone to her room and, no doubt, straight to
bed. I talked to my uncle for a few moments, and then
left.

It would be vain for me to blame the perverseness of
these incidents, unfortunate though they were. For
even if everything had favoured us, we should still
have invented our embarrassment ourselves. But no-
thing could have made me more wretched than that
Aiissa, too, should feel this. This is the letter I received
as soon as I got to Paris ;

‘ My friend, what a melancholy meeting I You seemed to
lay the blame on other people, but without being able to
convince yourself. And now I think - 1 know - it will be so
always. Ohl I beg of you, don’t let us see each other again I

• Why this awkwardness, this feeling of being in a false
position, this paralysis, this dumbness, when we have
everything in the world to say to each other ? The first day
of your return this very silence made me happy, because I
believed it would vanish, and that you would tell me the
most wonderful things ; it was impossible that you should
leave me without.

* But when our lugubrious expedition to Orcher came to
an end without a word, when, above aU, our hands un-
clasped and fell apart so hopelessly, I thought my heart
would have fainted within me for grief and pain. And what
distressed me most was not so much that your hand let go
m ine, but my feeling that if yours had not, mine would

86



have done so, for my hand too no longer felt happy ia
yours.

‘ The next day - yesterday ~ I expected you, madly, aU the
morning. I was too restless to stop indoors, and I left a
line for you to tell you where to find me on the jetty. I
stayed a long time looking at the stormy sea, but I was too
miserable looking at it without you ; I imagined suddenly
that you were waiting for me in my room, and went in. I
knew I shouldn’t be free in the afternoon ; Madeleine had
told me the day before that she meant to come, and as I
expected to see you in the morning I did not put her off.
But, perhaps, it was to her presence we owed the only
pleasant moments of our meeting. For a few minutes I had
the strange illusion that this comfortable conversation was
going to last a long, long time. And when you came up to
the sofa where I was sitting beside her, and bent down and
said “good-bye”, I could not answer ; it seemed as though it
were the end of everything ; it suddenly dawned upon me
that you were going.

‘You had no sooner left with Madeleine, than it struck me
as impossible, unbearable. Will you believe it? I went outl
I wanted to speak to you again, to teU you all the things I
had not told you ; I was already hurrying to the Piantiers’
... It was late ; I didn’t have time, didn’t dare ... I came in
again, desperate, to write to you - that I didn’t want to
write to you any more - a good-bye letter because I felt too
much that our correspondence was nothing but a vast
mirage, that we were each writing, alas I only to ourselves
and that - Jerome I Jerome I Ah I how far apart we were all
the time I

T tore that letter up, it is true; but now I am writing it
over again, almost the same. Oh 1 1 do not love you less, my
dearl On the contrary, I never before felt so dearly, by my
very disturbance, by my embarrassment as soon as you
came near me, how deeply I loved you ; but hopelessly too,
for I must perforce confess it to myself - when you were

87



away, I loved you more. I had already begun to suspect so,
alas! Tills longed-for meeting has fibaally shown me the
truth, and you, too, my friend, must needs be convinced of
it. Good-bye, my much-loved brother ; may God keep and
guide you! To Him alone can we draw near with impunity.*

And as if this letter were not sufficiently pamful, the
next day she had added the following postscript :

T do not wish to let this letter go without asking you to
show a little more discretion in regard to what concerns us
both. Many a time you have wounded me by talking to
Juliette or Abel about things which should have remained
private between you and me, and this is, indeed, what made
me think - long before you suspected it - that your love
was above all intellectual, the beautiful tenacity of a tender
faithful mind,*

The fear lest I should show this letter to Abel had
doubtless inspired the last lines. What suspicious in-
stinct had put her on her guard? Had she formerly
detected in my words some reflexion of my friend's
advice?

In truth, I felt myself far enough away from him!
The paths we followed were henceforth divergent ; and
there was little need of these recommendations to teach
me to bear the anxious burden of my grief alone.

The next three days were wholly occupied by my
pleading ; I wished to reply to Alissa ; I was afraid of
incurably inflaming the wound by too deliberate a dis-
cussion, by too vehement protestations, by the slightest
clumsy word ; twenty times over I began the letter in
which my love struggled for its life. I cannot to this day
re-read, without weeping, the tear-stained paper, which
is the copy of the one I at last decided to send ;

88



^Aiissa! Hare pity on me, on us both! Your letter hurts
me. How much I wish I could smile at your fears I Yes, I
felt everything you write; but I was afraid to own it to
myself. What frightful reality you give to what is merely
imaginary, and how you thicken it between us I

‘If you feel that you love me less ... Ah! let me dismiss
this cruel supposition, which your whole letter contradicts I
But then, of what importance are your fleeting apprehen-
sions? Alissa ! As soon as I begin to argue, my words freeze ;
I can only hear the weeping of my heart. I love you too
much to be skilful, and the more I love you the less I know
what to say to you. “ Intellectual love!” ... what am I to
answer to that? When it is with my whole soul that I love
you, how can I distinguish between my intellect and my
heart? But since our correspondence is the cause of your
unkind imputation, since we have been so grievously hurt
by our fall into reality from the heights to which that corre-
spondence had raised us, since, if you were to write to me
now you would think that you were writing only to your-
self, since, too, I have not strength to bear another letter
like your last - please, for a time, let us stop all communi-
cation.’

In the rest of my letter I protested and appealed
against her judgement, imploring her to grant us the
opportunity of another interview. The last had had
everything against it ; the scene, the personages, the
time of year - and even our correspondence, whose
impassioned tone had prepared us for it with so little
prudence. This time it should be preceded only by
silence. I wished it to take place in the spring, at Fon-
gueusemare, where my uncle would let me stay during
the Easter holidays, for as long or as short a time as she
herself should think fit.

My determination was firmly taken, and as soon as
89



my letter had gone I was able to bury myself in my
work.

I was to see Alissa once more before the end of the
year. Miss Ashburton, whose health had been declining
for some months past, died four days before Christmas.
On my return from my military service I had gone back
to stay with her. I left her very litde and was present at
her last moments. A card from Alissa showed -me that
our vow of silence lay nearer her heart than my be-
reavement ; she would come up, she said, for the day,
just to go to the funeral, which my uncle would not be
able to attend.

She and I were almost the only mourners to be
present at the burial service and afterwards to follow
the coffin. We walked side by side and exchanged barely
a few sentences ; but in church where she took her seat
beside me, I several times felt her eyes resting tenderly
upon me.

*It is agreed,’ said she, as she left me, * nothing before
Easter.’

‘No, but at Easter . . . ’

‘I will expect you.’

We were at the gate of the cemetery, I suggested
taking her to the station ; but she called a cab and with-
out a word of farewell, left me.



CHAPTER SEVEN


^Alissa is waiting for you in the garden/ said my
uncle, after having embraced me paternally, when one
day at the end of April I arrived at Fongueusemare. If
at first I was disappointed at not finding her ready to
welcome me, the next moment I was grateful that she
had spared us both the first commonplace greetings.

She was at the bottom of the garden. I made my way
to the place at the head of the steps, where, at this time
of year, the shrubs that set it closely round were all
in flower - lilacs, rowan trees, laburnums, and weige-
lias : in order not to catch sight of her from too far, or
so that she should not see me coming, I took the other
side of the garden, along the shady path, where the air
was cool beneath the branches.

I advanced slowly ; the sky was like my joy — ^warm,
bright, delicately pure. No doubt she was expecting me
by the other path. I was close to her, behind her, before
she heard me ; I stopped ... and as if time could have
stopped with me, ‘ This is the moment, * thought I, ‘the
most delicious moment, perhaps, of all, even though it
should precede happiness itself -■ which happiness itself
will not equal.’

I meant to fall on my knees before her ; I took a step
which she heard. She got up suddenly, letting the em-
broidery at which she was working roll to the ground ;
she stretched out her arms towards me, put her hands
on my shoulders. For a few moments we stayed so,
with her arms outstretched, her face smiling and bent

9 ^



towards me, looking at me tenderly without speaking.
She was dressed all in white. On her grave face - almost
too grave - 1 recognized her childhood^'s smile.

‘Listen, Alissa,’ I cried suddenly. ‘I have twelve days
before me. I will not stay one more than you please.
Let us settle on a sign, which shall mean : “ To-morrow
you must leave Fongueusemare.*' The next day I will
go, without recrimination, without complaint. Do you
agree?’

As I had not prepared what I was going to say, I
spoke more easily. She reflected a moment ; then :

‘The evening that I come down to dinner without
wearing the amethyst cross you like . . . will you under-
stand? ’

‘ That is to be my last evening.’

‘But will you be able to go without a tear or a
sigh?’

‘ Without a good-bye. I will leave you on that last
evening exactly as I shall have done the evening before,
so simply that you will wonder whether I have under-
stood. But when you look for me the next morning, I
shall just not be there.’

‘I shall not look for you the next morning.’

She held out her hand ; as I raised it to my lips, I
added ;

‘But from now till the fatal evening, not an allusion
to make me feel that it is coming.’

‘And you, not an allusion to the parting that will
follow.’

The embarrassment, which the solemnity of this
meeting was in danger of creating between us, had
now to be dispelled.

‘I should so much like,’ I went on, ‘that these few

9Z



days with you should seem like other days ... I mean
that we should not feel, either of us, that they are ex-
ceptional. And then ... if we were not to try too hard
to talk just at first . .

She began to laugh. I added :

"Isnk there anything we could do together?’

Ever since we could remember we bad taken great
pleasure in gardening. An inexperienced gardener had
lately replaced the old one, and there was a great deal to
be done in the garden, which had been neglected for
the last two months. Some of the rose trees had been
badly pruned ; some, luxuriant growers, were encum-
bered with dead wood ; some of the ramblers had come
down for want of the necessary props ; others were
being exhausted by suckers. Most of them had been
grafted by us ; we recognized our nurslings ; the at-
tention of which they were in need took up a large part
of our time, and allowed us during the first three days
to talk a great deal without saying anything of weight,
and, when we said nothing, it enabled us not to feel our
silence burdensome.

In this way we once more grew accustomed to one
another. It was on this familiarity that I counted, rather
than on any actual explanation. The very recoUectioJ
of our separation was already beginning to disappear
from between us, and the fearfulness which I used to
feel in her, the tension of spirit which she used to fear
in me, were already beginning to grow less. Alissa
seemed younger than during my melancholy visit of
the autumn, and I had never bought her prettier. I had
not yet kissed her. Every evening I saw sparkling on
her bodice the little amethyst cross, which she wore
hanging from a gold chain round her neck. Hope

95



meeting last autumn, so now the memory of your presence
yesterday disenchants my letter of to-day. What has hap-
pened to the delight I used to take in writing to you ? By
writing to each other, by being with each other, we have
exhausted all that is pure in the joy to which our love dares
aspire. And now, in spite of myself, I exclaim, like Orsino
in Twelph Night: ‘'Enough, no more; ’tis not so sweet now
as it was before.”

'Good-bye, my friend. Hk incipit amor Dei. Ah! will you
ever know how much I love you ? . . . Until the end I will
be your

‘Alissa.’

Against the snare of virtue I was defenceless. All
heroism attracted and dazzled me, for I could not
separate it from love. Alissa’s letter inspired me with
a rash and intoxicating enthusiam. God knows that I
strove after more virtue only for her sake. Any path,
provided it climbed upwards, would lead me to her.
Ah! the ground could not too soon narrow enough to
hold only her and me! Alas! I did not suspect the
subtlety of her feint, and little imagined that it would
be by a height where there was room for only one, that
she might escape me once more.

I replied lengthily. I remember the only passage of
my letter that was at all clear-sighted.

oiften think,’ I said, ‘that my love is the best part
of me : that all my virtues are suspended to it ; that it
raises me above myself, and that without it I should
fall back to the mediocre level of a very ordinary dis-
position. It is the hope of reaching you that will always
make me think the steepest path the best.’

What did I add which could have induced her to
answer as follows :


96



‘But, my friend, holiness is not a choice; it is an obliga-
tion’ [the word was underlined three times in her letter]. ‘If
you are what I take you to be, will not be able to evade
it cither/

That was all. I understood, or rather I had a fore-
boding, that our correspondence would stop there, and
that neither the most cunning counsels nor the most
steadfast determination would be of any avail.

I wrote again, however, lengthily, tenderly. After my
third letter I received this note :

‘ My friend,

‘Do not imagine that I have made any resolution not to
write to you; I merely no longer take any pleasure in
writing. And yet your letters still interest me, but I re-
proach myself more and more for engrossing so much of
your thoughts.

‘The summer is not far off. I propose that we give up our
correspondence for a time, and that you come and spend
the last fortnight of September with me at Fongueusemare.
Do you accept ? If you do, I have no need of a reply. I shall
take your silence for consent, and hope, therefore, that you
will not answer/

I did not answer. No doubt this silence was only the
last trial to which she was subjecting me. When, after
a few months’ work and a few weeks’ travel, I returned
to Fongueusemare, it was with the most tranquil assur-
ance.

How should I, by a simple recital, make clear at once
what I myself understood at first so ill? What can I
paint here save the occasion of the wretchedness which
from that moment overwhelmed me wholly? For if I
have no forgiveness in my heart to-day for my failure
to recognize that love that was still throbbing, hidden

97



meeting last autumn, so now the memory of your presence
yesterday disenchants my letter of to-day. What has hap-
pened to the delight I used to take in writing to you ? By
writing to each other, by being with each other, we have
exhausted all that is pure in the joy to which our love dares
aspire. And now, in spite of myself, I exclaim, like Orsino
in Twelfth Night: “Enough, no more; ’tis not so sweet now
as it was before.'^’

‘Good-bye, my friend. Hie incipit amor Dei. Ah I will you
ever know how much I love you ? . . . Until the end I will
be your

‘Alissa.’

Against the snare of virtue I was defenceless. AU
heroism attracted and da2:2led me, for I could not
separate it from love. AHssa’s letter inspired me with
a rash and intoxicating enthusiam. God knows that I
strove after more virtue only for her sake. Any path,
provided it climbed upwards, would lead me to her.
Ah! the ground could not too soon narrow enough to
hold only her and me! Alas! I did not suspect the
subtlety of her feint, and little imagined that it would
be by a height where there was room for only one, that
she might escape me once more.

I replied lengthily. I remember the only passage of
my letter that was at all clear-sighted.

'I often think,’ I said, ‘that my love is the best part
of me : that all my virtues are suspended to it ; that it
raises me above myself, and that without it I should
fall back to the mediocre level of a very ordinary dis-
position. It is the hope of reaching you that will always
make me think the steepest path the best’

What did I add which could have induced her to
answer as follows :


96



*But, my friend, holiness is not a choice; it is an obliga-
tion’ [the word was underlined three times in her letter]. ‘If
you are what I take you to h&^you will not be able to evade
it cither.’

That was all. I understood, or rather I had a fore-
boding, that our correspondence would stop there, and
that neither the most cunning counsels nor the most
steadfast determination would be of any avail.

I wrote again, however, lengthily, tenderly. After my
third letter I received this note :

‘ My friend,

^Do not imagine that I have made any resolution not to
write to you; I merely no longer take any pleasure in
writing. And yet your letters still interest me, but I re-
proach myself more and more for engrossing so much of
your thoughts.

‘The summer is not far oflF. I propose that we give up our
correspondence for a time, and that you come and spend
the last fortnight of September with me at Fongueusemare.
Do you accept ? If you do, I have no need of a reply, I shall
take your silence for consent, and hope, therefore, that you
will not answer.’

I did not answer. No doubt this silence was only the
last trial to which she was subjecting me. When, after
a few months’ work and a few weeks’ travel, I returned
to Fongueusemare, it was with the most tranquil assur-
ance.

How should I, by a simple recital, make clear at once
what I myself understood at first so iU? What can I
paint here save the occasion of the wretchedness which
from that moment overwhelmed me wholly? For if I
have no forgiveness in my heart to-day for my failure
to recognize that love that was still throbbing, hidden

97



under a semblance so artificial, it was at first only this
semblance that I was able to see ; and so, no longer
finding my friend, I accused her ... No 1 Even then,
Alissa, I did not accuse you, but wept despairingly that
I could recognize you no longer. Now that I can gauge
the strength of your love by the cunning of its silence
and by its cruel workings, must I love you all the more,
the more agonizingly you bereft me?

Disdain? Coldness? No ; nothing that could be over-
come ; nothing against which I could even struggle :
and sometimes I hesitated, doubting whether I had not
invented my misery, so subtle seemed its cause, and so
skilful was Alissa’s pretence of not understanding it.
What should I have complained of? Her welcome was
more smiling than ever ; never had she shown herself
more cordial, more attentive ; the first day I was almost
taken in by it. What did it naatter, after aU, that she did
her hair in a new way, which flattened it and dragged it
back from her face, so that her features were harshened
and their true expression altered - that an unbecoming
dress, dull in colour and ugly in texture, turned the
delicate rhythm of her body to clumsiness? ... There
was nothing here, I thought blindly, that might not be
remedied the very next day, either of her own accord
or at my request. I was more unpleasantly aflected by the
cordiality, by the attentions, which were so foreign to
our habits, and in which I was afraid I saw more deli-
beration than spontaneity, and, though I scarcely dare
say so, more politeness than love.

That evening, when I went into the drawing-room,
I was astonished not to find the piano in its usual place ;
Alissa answered my exclamation of disappointment in
her most tranquil voice :



‘ It has gone to be done up, dear.’

^ But I repeatedly told you, my child,’ said my uncle,
in a tone of reproach that was almost severe, ‘that as it
had done well enough up till now, you might have
waited until Jerome had gone before sending it away ;
your haste has deprived us of a great pleasure.’

‘But, father,’ said she, turning aside to blush, ‘I
assure you it had got so jingly latterly that Jerome him-
self wouldn’t have been able to get anything out of it.’

‘When you played it, it didn’t seem so bad,’ said my
uncle.

She stayed a few moments in the shadow, stooping
down, as if she were engaged in taking the measure-
ments of a chair cover, then she left the room abruptly,
and did not return till later, when she brought in the
tray with the cup of tisane which my uncle was in the
habit of taking every evening.

The next day she changed neither the way of doing
her hair nor her dress ; seated beside her father on a
bench in front of the house, she went on with the
mending on which she had already been engaged the
evening before. On the bench or the table beside her
was a great basket full of stockings and socks into
which she dipped. A few days later it was towels and
sheets. This work absorbed her, it seemed, to such a
pitch that every gleam of expression vanished from her
lips and her eyes.

‘ Alissa ! ’ I exclaimed the first evening, almost tern-
fied by this obliteration of all poetry ficom her face,
which I could hardly recognize, and at which I had
been gazing for some moments without her seeming
to feel my look.


99



‘WKat is it?’ said she, laising her head.

‘I wanted to see if you would hear me. Your
thoughts seemed so far away from me.’

‘No ; they are here ; but this darning requires a great
deal of attention.’

‘Would you like me to read to you while you are
sewing?’

‘I am afraid I shouldn’t be able to listen very well.’

‘Why do you choose such absorbing work to do?’

‘ Someone must do it’

‘There are so many poor women who would be glad
to do it for the sake of earning a trifle. It can’t be from
economy that you undertake such a tedious task?’

She at once assured me that she liked no other kind
of sewing so much, that it was the only kind she had
done for a long time past, and that she was doubtless
out of practice for doing anything else. She smiled as
she spoke. Never had her voice been sweeter than now,
when she was so grieving me. ‘I am saying nothing but
what is natural,’ her face seemed to declare, ‘why
should it make you sad?’

And my whole heart’s protest no longer even rose to
my Hps - it choked me.

A day or two later, as we had been picking roses, she
invited me to carry them for her to her room, into
which I had not as yet been this year. What flattering
hopes arose in me at once I For I had not got beyond
blaming myself for my sadness ; one word from her
would have healed my heart.

I never went into this room without emotion ; I can-
not teM what it was that made up the kind of melodious
peace which breathed in it, and in which I recognized


lOO



Aiissa. The blue shadow of the cujctains at the windows
and round the bed, the furniture of shining mahogany,
the order, the spotlessness, the silence, all spoke to my
heart of her purity and pensive grace.

I was astonished that morning to see that two large
photographs of some Masaccios, which I had brought
back from Italy, were no longer on the wall beside her
bed ; I was on the point of asking her what had become
of them when my glance feU on the bookshelf close by,
where she used to keep her bedside books. This little
collection had been gradually formed, partly by the
books I had given her, partly by others which we had
read together. I had just noticed that all these books
had been removed, and that they had been replaced
exclusively by a number of insignificant litde works of
vulgar piety, for which I hoped she had nothing but
contempt. Raising my eyes suddenly, I saw that AHssa
was laughing - yes, laughing - as she watched me.

‘I beg your pardon,’ said she at once: ‘your face
made me laugh ; it fell so abruptly when you saw my
bookcase.’

I felt very little inclined for pleasantry.

‘No, really, Alissa, is that what you read now?’

* ‘ Yes, certainly. What is it surprises you? ’

‘I should have thought that a mind accustomed to
substantial food would have been disgusted by such
sickly stuff/

‘I don’t understand you,’ said she. ‘These arc
humble souls who talk to me simply, and express
themselves as best they can. I take pleasure in their
society. I know beforehand that they will not fall into
any snare of fine language, and that I, as I read, shall
not be tempted by any profane admiration.’


lOI



‘Do you read nothing but that, then, now ? ’
‘Almost. Yes, for the last few months. But I haven’t
much time for reading now. And I confess that quite
lately, when I tried to re-read one of the great authors
whom you taught me to admire, I felt like the man in
the Scriptures, who strives to add a cubit to his height.*
‘Who is this “great author” who has given you such
an odd opinion of yourself?*

‘He didn’t give it me, but it was while reading him
that I got it. ... It was Pascal. Perhaps I lighted on
some passage that was not so good. . . .*

I made an impatient movement. She spoke in a clear
monotonous voice, as if she were reciting a lesson, not
lifting her eyes from her flowers, which she went on
arranging and rearranging interminably. She stopped
for an instant at my movement and then continued in
the same tone :

‘Such surprising grandiloquence and such effort I ~
and to prove so little 1 1 wonder sometimes whether his
Lthetic intonation is not the result of doubt rather
an of faith. The voice of perfect faith speaks with
wer tears, with fewer tremors.*

‘It is just those very tremors, those very tears which
lake the beauty of his voice,’ I endeavoured to retort,
though dispiritedly ; for in her words I could recog-
ize nothing of what I loved in Alissa. I write them
own as I remember them, and without any after
ddition of either art or logic.

‘If he had not first emptied this life of its joy,’ she
went on, ‘it would weigh heavier in the balance
than ...’

‘Than what?’ I asked, for I was amazed at her
strange sayings.


102



‘Than the uncertain felicity he holds out/

‘Don’t you believe in it, then?’ I exclaimed.

* No matter I ’ she answered ; ‘ I wish it to remain un-
certain, so that every suspicion of a bargain may be
removed. The soul that loves God steeps itself in virtue
out of natural nobility, and not for the hope of reward. ’
‘And that is the reason of the secret scepticism in
which nobility such as Pascal’s finds a refuge?’

‘Not scepticism - Jansenism,’ said she smiling.‘ What
have I to do with such things? These poor souls, here,’
she added, turning towards her books, ‘would be at a
loss to say whether they are Jansenist or quietist or
what not. They bow down before God like the grass
which is bent by the wind, without guile or anxiety or
beauty. They consider themselves of little account, and
know that their only value lies in their eifacement
before God.’

‘Alissal’ I cried, ‘why do you tear off your wings?’
Her voice remained so calm and natural that my excla-
mation seemed to me all the more absurdly emphatic.

She smiled again, and shook her head. ‘All that I
brought away from my last visit to Pascal . .

‘Was what?’ I asked, for she stopped.

‘This saying of Christ’s : “Whosoever shall seek to
save his life shall lose it.” And as for that,’ she went on,
smiling still more and bolting me steadily in the face,
‘I really hardly understood him any longer. When one
has lived any time in the society of such lowly ones as
these, it is extraordinary how quickly the sublimity of
the great leaves one breathless and exhausted.’

Would my discomposure allow me no answer?

‘ If I were obliged to read ail these sermons and tracts
with you now . .

105



she interrupted, ‘I should be very sorry to see
you read them! I agree with you; I think you were
meant for much better things than that/

She spoke quite simply and without seeming to sus-
pect that my heart might be rent by these words which
implied the separation of our lives. My head was burn-
ing ; I should have Hked to go on speaking ; I should
have liked to cry ; perhaps my tears would have van-
quished her ; but I remained without saying a word, my
elbows on the mantelpiece, my head buried in my
hands. She went on calmly arranging her flowers, see-
ing nothing ~ or pretending to see nothing of my
suflering. . . .

At this moment the first bell rang.

shall never be ready for lunch,’ said she. ‘You
must go away now.’ And as if it had been nothing but
play: ‘We will go on with this conversation another
time.’

We never went on with the conversation. Alissa con-
dnually eluded me ; not that she ever appeared to be
avoiding me ; but every casual occupation became a
duty of far more urgent importance. I had to wait my
rn ; I only came after the constantly recurring cares of
^ household, after she had attended to the alterations
kt were being carried out in the barn, after her visits
siu the farmers, and after her visits to the poor, with'
whom she busied herself more and more. I had the time
that was left over, and very little it was ; I never saw her
but she was in a hurry - though it was still, perhaps, in
the midst of these trivial occupations, and when I gave
up pursuing her, that I least felt how much I had been
dispossessed. The sHghtest talk showed it me more
clearly. When Alissa granted me a few minutes, it was.


104



indeed, for the most laborious couTersation to which
she lent herself as one does to playing with a child. She
passed beside me swiftly, absent-minded and smiBng ;
and I felt she had become more distant than if I had
never known her. It even seemed to me sometimes that
there was a kind of challenge in her smile, or at any rate
a kind of irony, and that she took amusement in thus
eluding my wishes. . . . And at that it was myself that I
turned to upbraid, not wishing to give way to re-
proaches, and, indeed, hardly knowing what might be
expected from her, nor with what I could reproach
her.

Thus the days from which I had promised myself so
much felicity passed by. I contemplated thek flight
with stupor, but without desiring to increase their
number or delay thek passage, so greatly each one
aggravated my grief. Two days before my departure,
however, Alissa came with me to the bench beside the
deserted marl-pit ; it was a bright autumn evening : as
far as the cloudless horizon, every blue-tinted detail of
the landscape stood out distinct and clear, and in the
past the dimmest of its memories. I could not withhold
my lamentations as I showed her my present unhappi-
ness - as I showed her the happiness I had lost.

‘ But what is it I can do, my firiend? ’ she said at once.
* You are in love with a phantom.’

‘No, not with a phantom, Alissa.’

‘ With a creature of your imagination.’

‘Alas! I am not inventing. She was once my friend.
I call upon her. AHssa 1 Alissa I it was you I loved. What
have you done with yourself? What have you made
yourself become? ’

She remained a few moments without answering.


105



slowly pulling a flower to pieces and keeping her head
down. Then, at last :

‘Jerome, why don’t you simply admit that you love
me less?’

‘Because it’s not true! Because it’s not true!’ I ex-
claimed indignantly : ‘because I never loved you more.’

‘You love me - and yet you regret mel’ said she,
trying to smile, and slightly shrugging her shoulders.

T cannot put my love into the past.’

The ground was giving way beneath me ; and I
caught at anything.

‘It must pass with the rest.’

* A love like mine will pass only with me.’

‘It will gradually grow less. The ABssa whom you
think you still love, already exists only in your
memory; a day will come when you will only re-
member that you loved her.’

■ ‘You speak as if her place might be taken in my
heart, or as if my heart were going to stop loving.
Do you no longer remember that you once loved me
yourself that you take such pleasure in torturing me?’

I saw her pale lips tremble ; in an almost inaudible
|voke she whispered ;

‘No, no ; Alissa has not changed in that.’

‘Why, then nothing has changed,’ I said, seizing her
arm. ...

She went on more firmly ;

‘One word would explain everything; why don’t
you dare say it?’

‘What word?’

‘I have grown older.’

‘Hush!’

I protested immediately that I myself had grown as
io6



much older as she, that the difference of age between us
remained the same . . . but she had regained control of
herself ; the one and only moment had gone by, and by
beginning to argue I let slip my advantage ; the ground
gave way beneath me.

Two days later I left Fongueusemare, discontented
with her and with myself, full of a vague hatred against
what I still called ^virtue’, and of resentment against
the habitual occupation of my heart. It seemed as
though during this last meeting, and through the very
exaggeration of my love, I had come to the end of all
my fervour ; each one of Alissa’s phrases, against which
I had at first rebelled, remained alive and triumphant
within me, after my protestations had died away. Yes,
no doubt, she was right I It was nothing but a phantom
that I cared for ; the Alissa that I had loved, that I still
loved, was no more. . . . Yes, no doubt we had grown
old I This frightful obliteration of aU poetry which had
chilled my very heart, was nothing, after all, but a re-
turn to the natural course of things ; if by slow degrees
I had exalted her, if out of her I had made myself an
idol, and adorned it with all that I was enamoured of,
what now remained to me as the result of my labours
but my fatigue? As soon as she was left to herself,
Alissa had relapsed to her own level - a mediocre level,
on which I found myself too, but on which I no longer
desired her. Ah! how absurd and fantastic seemed this
exhausting effort of virtue in order to reach her there,
on the heights where she had been placed by my own
sole endeavour. A little less pride and our love would
have been easy , . . but what sense was there in persist-
ing in a love without object? This was to be obstinate
107



not to be faithful Faithtui to what? To a delusion.
Was it not wiser to admit to myself that I had been
mistaken?

In the meantime I had been offered a place in the
School of Athens ; I agreed to take it up at once, with
no feeling of either ambition or pleasure, but welcom-
ing the idea of departure as though it had been an
escape.



CHAPTER EIGHT


And yet I saw Alissa once more. It was three years
later, towards the end of summer. Ten months before,
I had heard from her the news of my uncle’s death. A
fairly long letter, which I had at once written her from
Palestine, where I was travelling at the time, had re-
mained unanswered.

Happening to be at Le Havre, on I forget what
errand, a natural instinct set me on the road to Fon-
gueusemare. I knew AHssa was there, but I was afraid
she might not be alone. I had not announced my ar-
rival ; shrinking from the idea of presenting myself like
an ordinary visitor, I went on my way undecided;
should I go in? or should I go away without having
seen her, without having tried to see her? Yes, without
doubt, I would just walk up the avenue, sit on the
bench where sometimes, perhaps, she still went to sit
. . . and I was already beginning to wonder what token
I could leave behind me, which after I had gone, would
tell of my coming . . . Thus reflecting, I walked slowly
on ; and now that I had resolved not to see her, the
sharpness of the sorrow which wrung my heart began
to give way to a melancholy that was almost sweet. I
had already reached the avenue, and, for fear of being
taken unawares, I was walking on the footpath which
ran along the bottom of the bank skirting the farm-
yard. I knew a place on the bank from which one could
look over into the garden ; I climbed up ; a gardener
whom I did not recognize was raking one of the paths
109



and soon disappeared from sight. There was a new gate
to the courtyard. A dog barked as I went by. Further
on, where the avenue came to an end, I turned to the
right, came again upon the garden wall, and was mak-
ing my way to the portion of the beech wood, parallel
to the avenue I had left, when, as I was passing by the
little door that led into the kitchen garden, the idea of
going in suddenly seized me.

The door was shut. The inside bolt, however, offered
only a slight resistance and I was on the point of forcing
it open with my shoulder. ... At that moment I heard
the sound of steps ; I drew back round the corner of
the wall.

I could not see who it was that came out of the
garden ; but I heard, I felt it was Alissa. She took three
steps forward and called in a weak voice :

‘Is that you, Jerome?’

My heart, which was beating violently, stopped, and
as no word would come from my choking throat, she
repeated louder:

‘Jerome I Is that you?’

At hearing her call me in this way, the emotion which
seized on me was so great that it forced me to my knees.
As I still did not answer, Alissa took a few steps for-
ward, turned the corner of the wall, and I suddenly felt
her against me - against me, who was kneeling there
hiding my face with my arm, as if in dread of seeing her
too soon. She remained a few moments stooping over
me, while I covered her frail hands with kisses.

‘Why were you hiding?’ she said, as simply as if
those three years of absence had lasted only a few days.

‘How did you guess it was I?*

‘I was expecting you.’


no



^Expecting me?’ said I, so astonished that I could
only repeat her words, wondering , . . And as I was still
on my knees :

‘Let us go to the bench/ she went on. ‘Yes, I knew
I was to see you again once more. For the last three
days I hare come here every evening and called you, as
I did to-night Why didn’t you answer?’

‘If you had not come upon me by surprise, I should
have gone away without seeing you,’ I said, steeling
myself against the emotion which had at first over-
mastered me. ‘I happened to be at Le Havre, and
merely meant to walk along the avenue and roxmd the
outside of the garden and to rest a few moments on
this bench, where I thought you might still come to
sit sometimes, and then , .

‘Look what I have brought here to read for the last
three evenings,’ she interrupted, and held out to me a
packet of letters ; I recognized those I had written her
from Italy. At that moment I raised my eyes to look at
her. She was extraordinarily changed; her thinness, her
paleness smote my heart horribly. Leaning heavily
upon my arm, she clung to me as though she were
frightened or cold. She was still in deep mourning, and
no doubt the black lace which she had put round her
head, and which framed her face, added to her paleness.
She was smiling, but her failing limbs seemed hardly to
bear her up. I was anxious to know whether she was
alone at Fongueusemare. No, Robert was living with
her: Juliette, fidouard, and their children had been
spenchng August with them. . . . We had reached the
bench ; we sat down and the conversation for a few
minutes longer dragged along in the usual common-
place enquiries.


III



She asked after my work. I replied with a bad grace.
I should have liked her to feel that my work no longer
interested me. I should have liked to disappoint her as
she had disappointed me. I do not know whether I
succeeded, but if so, she did not show it. As for me, full
of both resentment and love, I did my best to speak as
curdy as possible, and was angry with myself for the
emotion which at times made my voice tremble.

The setting sun, which had been hidden for a few
moments by a cloud, reappeared on the edge of the
horizon almost opposite us, flooding the empty fields
with a shimmering glory and heaping the narrow valley
that opened at our feet with a sudden profusion of
wealth; then it disappeared. I sat there dazzled and
speechless ; I felt that I was wrapped round and steeped
in a kind of golden ecstasy, in which my resentment
vanished and nothing survived in me but love. Alissa,
who had been leaning, drooping against me, sat up ;
she took out of her bodice a tiny packet wrapped up in
tissue paper, made as though she meant to give it rne,
stopped, seemed to hesitate, and, as I looked at her in
surprise :

‘Listen, Jerome,’ said she, ‘this is my amethyst cross
that I have here ; for the last three evenings I have
brought it here because for a long time past I have
been wanting to give it you.’

‘What am I to do with it?’ I asked her, rather brus-
quely.

‘Keep it in memory of me for your daughter.’

‘What daughter?’ I cried, looking at AHssa without
understanding her.

‘Please, listen to me quite calmly; no, don’t look at
me so ; don’t look at me ; it’s already difficult enough


II2



for me to speak to you ; but I must, I simply must say
this. Listen, Jerome: one day you will marry - no,
don't answer ; don't interrupt, I implore you. I only
want you to remember that I loved you very much,
and ... a long time ago . . . three years ago I thought
that a daughter of yours might one day wear this little
cross you liked, in memory of me. Oh! without know-
ing whose it was . . . and perhaps, too, you might give
her . . . my name . .

She stopped, her voice choking : I exclaimed, almost
with hostility :

‘Why not give it her yourself.^'

She tried to speak again. Her lips trembled like those
of a sobbing child, but she did not cry ; the extraordin-
ary light that shone in her eyes flooded her face with an
unearthly, an angelic beauty.

‘ Alissa 1 whom should I marry? You know I can love
no one but you ...' and suddenly clasping her wildly,
almost brutally in my arms, I crushed my kisses on her
lips. An instant I held her unresisting, as she half lay
back against me ; I saw her look grow dim ; then her
eyes closed, and in a voice so true and melodious that
never to my mind will it be equalled :

‘Have pity on us, my friend!' she said. ‘Oh! don't
spoil our love.'

Perhaps she said too : ‘Don't be cowardly!' or per-
haps it was I who said it to myself ; I cannot tell now ;
but suddenly flinging myself on my knees before her,
and folding my arms piously round her :

‘If you loved me so, why have you always repulsed
me? Think! I waited first for Juliette to be married; I
understood your waiting for her to be happy, too ; she
is happy ; you yourself have told me so. I thought for a

s.G. — 5 II 3



long time that you didn’t want to leave your father ;
but now we are both alone.’

‘Oh I don’t let us regret the past/ she murmured. ‘I
have turned the page now.’

‘There is still time, AHssa.’

‘No, my friend, there is not time. There was no
longer time from the moment when our love made us
foresee for one another something better than love.
Thanks to you, my friend, my dream climbed so high
that any earthly satisfaction would have been a declen-
sion. I have often thought of what our life with each
other would have been ; as soon as it had been less than
perfect, I could not have borne . . . our love.’

‘Did you ever think what our life would be without
each other?’

‘No I Never.’

‘Now you see! For the last three years, without you,
I have been drifting miserably about . . .’

The evening was drawing in.

‘I am cold,’ said she, getting up and wrapping her
shawl too closely round her for me to be able to take
her arm again. ‘You remember the Scripture text which
kroubled us so, and which we were afraid we didn’t
Bnderstand properly: “These all received not the
^promise, God having provided some better thing for
us” ’

‘Do you still believe those words?’

‘Indeed I must.’

We walked on for a few moments beside each other,
without saying anything more. She went on;

‘Can you imagine it, Jerome? - “Some better
thing! ” ’ And suddenly the tears started from her eyes,
as she repeated once more ; ‘ “ Some better thing! ” ’

114



We Had again reached the small garden door through
which she had come out a little before. She turned
towards me ;

' Good-bye r said she. ‘No, don’t come any further.
Good-bye, my beloved friend. Now ... the better
thing ... is going to begin.’

One moment she looked at me, at once holding me
fast and keeping me at arm’s length, her hands on my
shoulders, her eyes filled with an unspeakable love.

As soon as the door was shut, as soon as I heard the
bolt drawn behind her, I fell against the door, a prey to
the extremest despair, and stayed for a long time weep-
ing and sobbing in the night.

But to have kept her, to have forced the door, to
have entered by any means whatever into the house,
which yet would not have been shut against me - no,
even to-day, when I look back to the past and live it over
again - no, it was not possible to me, and whoever does
not understand me here, has understood nothing of
up till now.

Intolerable anxiety made me write to Juliette a few
days later. I told her of my visit to Fongueusemare, and
how much Alissa’s paleness and thinness had alarmed
me ; I implored her to see what could be done, and to
give me news which I could no longer expect to get '
from Alissa herself.

Less than a month later, I received the following
letter :

‘ My dear Jerome,

, ‘This is to give you very sad news ; our poor Alissa is no
more. Alas I the fears you expressed in your letter were only

X15



too well founded. For the last few months, without being
ill exactly, she seemed to be wasting away; she yielded,
however, to my entreaties and consented to see Dr A — ,
who wrote to me that there was nothing serious the matter
with her. But three days after the visit you paid her, she
suddenly left Fongueusemare. It was from a letter of
Robert’s that I learnt she was gone ; she writes to me so
seldom that if it had not been for him I should have known
nothing of her flight, for I should have been a long time
before taking alarm at her silence, I blamed Robert severely
for having let her go in this way, and for not having gone
with her to Paris. Will you believe that from that moment
we were ignorant of her address ? You can imagine my
sickening anxiety ; impossible to see her, impossible even
to write to her. Robert, it is true, went to Paris a few days
later, but he was unable to discover anything. He is so
slack that we could not trust to his taking the proper steps.
We had to tell the police; it was not possible to remain in
such cruel uncertainty. iSdouard then went himself, and at
last managed to discover the little nursing home where
Alissa had taken refuge. Alas I too late. I received a letter
from the head of the home announcing her death, and, at
the same time, a telegram from ^fidouard, who was not in
time to see her again. On the last day she had written our
address on an envelope, so that we might be told, and in
another envelope she had put the copy of a letter she had
sent our lawyer at Le Havre containing her last instructions.
I think there is a passage in this letter which concerns you :
I will let you know soon. iSdouard and Robert were able to
be present at the funeral which took place the day before
yesterday. They were not the only persons to follow the
bier. Some of the patients of the nursing home wished to
be present at the ceremony and to accompany the body to
the cemetery. As for me, I am expecting my fifth baby any
day now, and unfortunately I was unable to move,

‘My dear Jerome, I know the deep sorrow tiiis loss will

ii6



cause you, and I write to you with a breaking heart, I have
been obliged to stop in bed for the last two days, and I
write with difficulty, but I could not let anyone else, not
even ]fidouard or Robert, speak to you of her whom we
two, doubtless, were the only persons in the world to
know. Now that I am an almost old mother of a family, and
that the burning past is covered over with a heap of ashes,
I may hope to see you again. If business or pleasure ever
takes you to Nimes, come on to Aigues-Vives. l^douard
would be glad to know you, and you and I would be able
to talk together of Alissa. Good-bye, my dear Jerome.

‘Affectionately and sadly yours . .

A few days later, I learnt that Alissa had left Fon-
gueuscmare to her brother, but had asked that all the
things that were in her room and a few pieces of furni-
ture which she mentioned, should be sent to Juliette.
I was shortly to receive some papers which she had put
in a sealed packet addressed to me. I learnt, also, that
she had asked that the little amethyst cross which I had
refused at my last visit should be put round her neck,
and I heard from fidouard that this had been done.

The sealed packet which the lawyer sent me con-
tained AHssa’s journal, I here transcribe a considerable
number of its pages. I transcribe them without com-
mentary. You will imagine well enough the reflexions
I made as I read, and the commotion of my heart, of
which I could but give a too imperfect idea.



ALISSA’S JOURNAL
Aigues-Vives

Left Le Havre the day before yesterday; yesterday
arrived at Nimes; my first journey I With no house-
keeping to do and no cooking to look after, and con-
sequently with a slight feeling of idleness, to-day, the
23 rd May, 1 8 8-, my twenty-fifth birthday, I begin this
journal - without much pleasure, a little for the sake of
company ; for, perhaps for the first time iq my life, I
feel lonely - in a different, a foreign land almost, one
with whidi I have not yet made acquaintance. It has, no
doubt, the same things to say to me as Normandy - the
same -^at I listen to untiringly at Fongueusemare - for
God is nowhere different from Himself - but this
southern land speaks a language I have not yet heard,
and to which I listen wondering.

May

Juliette is dozing on a sofa near me - in the open
gallery which is the chief charm of the house, built as
it is after the Italian fashion. The gallery opens on to
the gravelled courtyard which is a continuation of the
garden. Without leaving her sofa, Juliette can sec the
lawn sloping down to the piece of water, where a tribe
of parti-coloured ducks disport themselves, and two
swans sail. A stream which^ they say, never runs dry in
the heat of any summer, feeds it and then ffows through
the garden, which merge^’^into^ grove of ever-increas-
ing wildness, more and more shut in by the bed of a
118



dried torrent on the one side and the vineyards on the
other, and finally strangled altogether between them.

jfidouard Teissieres yesterday showed my father the
garden, the farm, the cellars, and the vineyards, while
I stayed behind with Juliette - so that this morning,
while it was still very early, I was able to make my first
voyage of discovery in the park, by myself. A great
many plants and strange trees, whose names, how-
ever, I should have liked to know. I pick a twig of each
of them so as to be told what they are, at lunch. In
some of them I recognize the evergreen oaks which
Jerome admired in the gardens of the Villa Borghese
or Doria-Pamfili - so distantly related to our nor-
thern tree, of such a dliferent character! Almost at the
further end of the park there is a narrow, mysterious
glade which they shelter, bending over a carpet of
grass so soft to the feet that it seems an invitation to
the choir of nymphs. I wonder - I am almost scared
that my feeling for nature, which at Fongueusemare is
so profoundly Christian, should here become, in spite
of myself, half pagan. And yet the kind of awe which
oppressed me more and more was religious too. I
whispered the words : ^ hie nemus*. The air was crystal-
line; there was a strange silence. I was thinking of
' Orpheus, of Armida, when all at once there rose a
solitary bkd’s song, so near me, so pathetic, so pure,
that it seemed suddenly as though aU nature had been
awaiting it. My heart beat violently; I stayed for a
moment leaning against a tree, and then came in before
anyone was up.

z^tbMay

Still no letter from Jerome. If he had written to me
119



at Le Havre, Ms letter would have been forwarded, . . ,
I can confide my anxiety to no one but tMs book ; for
the last three days I have not been distracted from it for
an instant, either by our excursion yesterday to Les
Baux, or by reading, or by prayer., To-day I can write
of nothing else ; the curious melancholy from wMch I
have been suffering ever since I arrived at Aigues-Vives
has, perhaps, no other cause - and yet I feel it at such
a depth within me that it seems to me now as if it had
been there for a long time past, and as if the joy on
wMch I prided myself did no more than cover it over.

T]th Maj

Why should I lie to myself? It is by an effort of mind
that I rejoice in Juliette’s happiness. That happiness
wMch I longed for so much, to the extent of offering
my own in sacrifice to it, is painful to me, now that I
see that she has obtained it without trouble, and th ^ t
it is so different from what she and I imagined. How
complicated it all is ! Yes ... I see well enough that a
horrible revival of egoism in me is offended at her
having found' her happiness elsewhere than in my
sacrifice - at her not having needed my sacrifice in
order to be happy.

And now I ask myself, as I feel what uneasiness
Jerome’s silence causes me : Was that sacrifice really
consummated in my heart? I am, as it were, humiliated,
to feel that God no longer exacts it. Can it be that I was
not equal to it?

May

How dangerous tMs analysis of my sadness is 1 1 am
already growing attached to tMs book. Is my personal


120



vanity, which I thought I had mastered, reasserting its
rights here? No ; may my soul never use this joumal as
a nattering mirror before which to attire itself I It is not
out of idleness that I write, as I thought at first, but out
of sadness. Sadness is a state of sin^ which had ceased to
be mine, which I hate, from whose complications I wish
to free my soul. This book must help me to find my
happiness in myself once more.

Sadness is a complication. I never used to analyse my
happiness.

At Fongueusemare I was alone, too, still more alone
- why did I not feel it? And when Jerome wrote to me
from Italy, I was willing that he should see without me,
that he should live without me; I followed him in
thought, and out of his joy I made my own. And now,
in spite of myself, I want him ; without him every new
thing I see is irksome to me.

\oth June

Long interruption of this journal which I had
scarcely begun ; birth of little Lise ; long hours of
watching beside Juliette ; I take no pleasure in writing
anything here that I can write to Jerome. I should Hke
to keep myself from the intolerable fault which is com-
mon to so many women - that of writing too much. Let
me consider this notebook as a means of perfection.

There followed several pages of notes made in the course
of her reading, extracts, etc. Then, dated from Fongueuse-
mare once more :

i6tb July

Juliette is happy ; she says so, seems so ; I have no
right, no reason to doubt it. Whence comes this feeling


I2I



of dissatisfaction, of discomfort, which I have now
when I am with her? Perhaps from feeling that such
happiness is so practical, so easily obtained, so perfecdy
‘to measure’ that it seems to cramp the soul and stifle
it. . . .

And I ask myself now whether it is really happiness
that I desire, so much as the progress towards happiness.
Oh, Lord! preserve me from a happiness to which I
might too easily attain I Teach me to put off my happi-
ness, to place it as far away from me as Thou art.

Several pages here had been torn out ; they referred, no
doubt, to our painful meeting at Le Havre. The journal did
not begin again till the following year; the pages were not
dated, but had certainly been written at the time of my stay
at Fongueusemare.

Sometimes as I listen to him talking I seem to be
watching myself think. He explains me and discovers
me to myself. Should I exist without him? I am only
when I am with him —

Sometimes I hesitate as to whether what I feel for
him is really what people call love - the picture that is
generally drawn of love is so different .from that
which I should like to draw, I should like nothing to
be said about it, and to love him without knowing that
I love him. I should like, above all, to love Mm without
his knowing it.

I no longer get any joy out of that part of life that has
to be lived widiout Mm. My virtue is all only to please
Mm - and yet, when I am with Mm, I feel my virtue
weakening.

I used to like learning the piano, because it seemed
to me that I was able to make some progress in it every


I2Z



day. That too, perhaps, is the secret of the pleasure I
take in reading a book in a foreign language; not, in-
deed, that I prefer any other language whatever to our
own, or that the writers I admire in it appear to me in
any way inferior to those of other countries - but the
slight difficulty that lies in the pursuit of their meaning
and feeling, the unconscious pride of overcoming this
difficulty, and of overcoming it more and more suc-
cessfully, adds to my intellectual pleasure a certain
spiritual contentment, which it seems to me I cannot
do without.

However blessed it might be, I cannot desire a state
without progress. I imagine heavenly joy, not as a con-
founding of the spirit with God, but as an infinite, a
perpetual drawing near to Him . . . and if I were not
afraid of playing upon words I should say that I did
not care for any joy that was not progressive.

This morning we were sitting on the bench in the
avenue ; we were not talking, and did not feel any need
to talk. . . . Suddenly he asked me if I believed in a
future life.

‘ Oh! Jerome I ’ I cried at once, It is more than hope
I have ; it is certainty.’

^d it seemed to me, on a sudden, that my whole
faith had, as it were, been poured into that ex-
clamation.

H should Hke to know,’ he added. He stopped a few
moments; then: ^ Would you act differently without
your faith?’

‘How can I tell?’ I answered; and I added: ‘And
you, my dear, you yourself, and in spite of yourself, can
no longer act otherwise than as if you were inspired by


123



the liveliest faith. And I should not love you if you were
different,’

No, Jerome, no, it is not after a future recompense
that our virtue is striving ; it is not for recompense that
our love is seeking. A generous soul is hurt by the idea
of being rewarded for its efforts ; nor does it consider
virtue an adornment: no, virtue is the form of its
beauty.

Papa is not so well again ; nothing serious, I hope,
but he has been obliged to go back to his milk diet for
the last three days.

Yesterday evening, Jerome had just gone up to his
room; Papa, who was sitting up with me for a little,
left me alone for a few minutes. I was sitting on the
sofa, or rather - a thing I hardly ever do -- 1 was lying
down, I don’t know why. The lamp-shade was shading
my eyes and the upper part of my body from the light ;
I was mechanically looking at my feet, which showed
a little below my dress in the light thrown upon them
by the lamp. When Papa came back, he stood for a few
moments at the door, staring at me, oddly, half smiling,
half sad. I got up with a vague feeling of shyness ; then
he called me :

‘Come and sit beside me,’ said he; and, though it
was already late, he began speaking to me about my
mother, which he had never done since their separation.
He told me how he had married her, how much he had
loved her, and how much she had at first been to
him.

‘ Papa,’ I said to him at last, ‘ do, please, say why you
are telling me this this evening - what makes you tell
me this just this particular evening?’

124



^Because, just now, when I came into the dtawlng-
toom and saw you lying on the sofa, I thought for a
moment it was your mother.’

The reason I asked this so insistently was because
that very evening Jerome was reading over my shoul-
der, standing leaning over me. I could not see him, but
I felt his breath and, as it were, the warmth and pulsa-
tion of his body. I pretended to go on reading, but my
mind had stopped working ; I could not even distin-
guish the Hnes ; a perturbation so strange took posses-
sion of me that I was obliged to get up from my chair
quickly, whilst I still could; I managed to leave the
room for a few minutes, luckily without his noticing
anything. But a little later, when I was alone in the
drawing-room and lay down on the sofa, where Papa
thought I looked like my mother, at that very moment
I was thinking of her.

I slept very badly last night; I was disturbed, op-
pressed, miserable, haunted by the recollection of the
past, which came over me like a wave of remorse.

Lord, teach me the horror of ail that has any appear-
ance of evil.

Poor Jerome! If he only knew that sometimes he
would have but a single sign to make, and that some-
times I wait for him to make it. . . .

When I was a child, even then it was because of him
that I wanted to be beautiful. It seems to me now that
I have never striven after perfection, except for him.
And that this perfection can only be attained without
him, is of all Thy teachings, my God! the one that is
most disconcerting to my soul.

How happy must that soul be for whom virtue is one

I2J



with love I Sometimes I doubt whether there is any
other virtue than love ... to love as much as possible
and continually more and more. . . . But at other times,
alas I virtue appears to me to be nothing but resistance
to love. Whatl shall I dare to call that virtue which is
the most natural inclination of my heart? Oh, tempting
sophism 1 Specious allurement 1 Cunning mirage of
happiness 1

This morning I read in La Bruy^re :

‘In the course of this life one sometimes meets with
pleasures so dear, promises so tender, which are yet
forbidden us, that it is natural to desire at least that
they might be permitted ; charms so great can be sur-
passed only when virtue teaches us to renounce them.’

Why did I invent here that there was anything for-
bidden? Can it be that I am secretly attracted by a
charm more powerful and a sweetness greater still than
that of love? Ohl that it were possible to carry our own
souls forward together, by force of love, beyond love I

Alas ! I understand now only too well ; between God
and him there is no other obstacle but myself. If per-
haps, as he says, his love for me at first inclined him to
God, now that very love hinders him ; he lingers with
me, prefers me, and I am become the idol that keeps
|him back from making further progress in virtue. One
of us two must needs attain to it ; and as I despair of
overcoming the love in my coward heart, grant me,
my God, vouchsafe me strength to teach him to love
me no longer, so that at the cost of my merits I may
bring Thee his, which are so infibdtely preferable ...
and if to-day my soul sobs with grief at losing him, do
I not lose him to find him again hereafter in Thee?

126



Tell me, oh, my Godl what soul ever deserved Thee
more? Was he not born for something better than to
love me? And should I love him so much if he were to
stop short at myself? How much all that might become
heroic dwindles in the midst of happiness I

Sundaj

‘ God having provided some better thing for us/
Monday, yd May

To think that happiness is here, close by, offering
itself, and that one only has to put out one^s hand to
grasp it ...

This morning, as I was talking to him, I consum-
mated the sacrifice.

Monday evening

He leaves to-morrow. . . .

Dear Jerome, I still love you with infinite tenderness ;
but never more shall I be able to tell you so. The con-
straint which I lay upon my eyes, upon my Hps, upon
my soul, is so hard that to leave you is a relief and a
bitter satisfaction.

I strive to act according to reason, but at the moment
of action the reasons which make me act escape me, or
appear foolish ; I no longer believe in them.

The reasons which make me fly from him? I no
longer believe in them . . . And yet I fly from him, sadly
and without understanding why I fly.

Lord I that we might advance towards Thee, Jerome
and I together, each beside the other, each helping the
other; that we might walk along the way of life like
two pilgrims, of whom one says at times to the other ;

127



‘Lean on me, brother, if you are weary,’ and to wbdm
the other replies : ‘It is enough to feel you near me . .
But no I The way Thou teachest. Lord, is a narrow way
“ so narrow that two cannot walk in it abreast.

July

More than six weeks have gone by without my open-
ing this book. Last month, as I was re-reading some of
its pages, I become aware of a foolish, wicked anxiety
to write well . . . which I owe to him . . . .

As though in this book, which I began only so as to
help myself to do without him^ I was continuing to
write to him.

I have torn up all the pages which seemed to me to
be well written. (I know what I mean by this.) I ought to
have torn up all those in which there was any question
of him. I ought ,to have torn them ail up, I could
not.

And already, because I tore up those few pages, I had
a little feeling of pride ... a pride which I should laugh
at if my heart were not so sick.

It really seemed as though I had done something
meritorious, and as though what I had destroyed had
been of some importance I

I 6th July

I have been obliged to banish from my book-
shelves . . .

I fly from him in one book only to find him in
another. I hear his voice reading me even those pages
which I discover without him. I care only for what
interests him, and my mind has taken the form of his to
such an extent, that I can distinguish one from the
128



other no better than I did at the time when I took
pleasure in feeling they were one.

Sometimes I force myself to write badly in order to
escape from the rhythm of his phrases ; but even to
struggle against him is still to be concerned with him.
I have made a resolution to read nothing but the Bible
(perhaps the Imitation)^ and to write nothing more in
this book, except every evening the chief text of my
reading.

There followed a kind of diary, in which the date of each
day, starting with July ist, was accompanied by a text. I
transcribe only those which are accompanied by some com-
mentary.

zoth July

* Sell all that thou hast and give it to the poor.'

I understand that I ought to give to the poor this
heart of mine which belongs only to Jerome. And by
so doing should I not teach him at the same time to do
likewise? . . . Lord, grant me this courage.

z^thjuly

I have stopped reading the Interior Consolation. The
old-fashioned language greatly charmed me, but it was
distracting, and the almost pagan joy it gives me is far
removed from the edification which I set myself to get
from it.

I have taken up the Imitation again and not even in
the Latin text, which I was vain of understanding. I am
glad that the translation in which I read it should not
even be signed. It is true it is Protestant, but ‘adapted
to the use of ah Christian communities', says the title.

‘Oh, if thou wert sensible how much peace thou
119



wouldest procure for thyself and joy for others, by
lightly ordering thyself, methinks thou wouldest be
more solicitous for thy spiritual progress 1 ’

loth August

If I were to cry to Thee, my God, with the impulsive
faith of a child and with the heavenly tongues of
angels. ...

All this comes to me, I know, not from Jerome, but
from Thee.

Why, then, between Thee and me, dost Thou every-
where set his image?

14 A& August

Only two months more in which to complete my
work . . . Oh, Lord, grant me Thy help !

zotb August

I feel - 1 feel by my unhappiness that the sacrifice is not
consummated in my heart. My God, grant that hence-
forth I owe to none but Thee the joy that he alone used
to give me.

iZth August

How mediocre and miserable is the virtue to which
I attain! Do I then exact too much from myself? ... To
suffer no more.

What cowardice makes nie continually implore God
for His strength? My prayers now are nothing but
complainings.

Augmt

‘ Consider the lilies of the field . .

This simple saying plunged me this morning into a
130



sadness from wHch nothing could distract me. I went
out into the country and these words, which I kept
continually repeating to myself, filled my heart and eyes
with tears, I contemplated the vast and empty plain
where the labourer was toiling, bent over his plough.

‘The hlies of the field But, Lord, where are
they . . . ? '

i6tb September^ lo 6" clock at night

I have seen him again. He is here under this roof. I
see the light from his window shining on the grass. He
is still up as I write these lines, and perhaps he is think-
ing of me. He has not changed. He says so and I feel it.
Shall I be able to show myself to him such as I have
resolved to be, so that his love may disown me?

Z 4 th September

Oh, torturing conversation in which I succeeded in
feigning indifference - coldness, when my heart was
fainting within me I Up till now I had contented myself
with avoiding him. This morning I was able to believe
that God would give me strength to be victorious and
that to slink for ever out of the combat was to prove
myself a coward. Did I triumph? Does Jerome love me
a little less? Alas! I both hope and fear it together. I
have never loved him more.

And if it is Thy will. Lord, that to save him from me
I must compass my own perdition, so be it.

‘Enter into my heart and into my soul in order to
bear in them my sufferings and to continue to ensure in
me what remains to Thee to suffer of Thy Passion."

We spoke of Pascal . . .What did I say? What shameful



foolish words? I scored even as I uttered them,-
but to-night I repent them as a blasphemy. I turned
again to the heavy volume of the Femes, which opened
of itself at this passage in the letters to Mademoiselle de
Roannez :

*We do not feel our bonds as long as we follow
willingly him who leads ; but as soon as we begin to
resist and to draw away, then indeed we suffer.’

These words affected me so personally that I did not
have strength to go on reading, but opening the book
in another place I came across an admirable passage
which I did not know and which I have just copied out.

The first volume of the Journal came to an end here. No
doubt the next had been destroyed, for in the papers which
Alissa left behind the Journal did not begin again till three
years later - still at Fongueusemare - in September - a short
time, that is to say, before our last meeting.

The last volume begins with the sentences which follow.

17//& September

IJdy God, Thou knowest I have need of him to love
Thee.

zoth September

My God, give him to me so that I may give Thee my
heart.

My God, let me see him only once more.

My God, I engage to give Thee my heart. Grant me
what my love beseeches. I will give what remains to me
of life to Thee alone.

My God, forgive me this despicable prayer, but I
cannot keep his name from my lips nor forget the
anguish of my heart.


152



My God, I cry to Thee. Do not forsake me in my
distress.

2 ir/ September

‘ Whatever ye shall ask the Father in my name . .

Lord, in Thy name, I dare not.

But though I no longer formulate my prayer, wilt
Thou be the less aware of the delirious longing of my
heart?

i“jth September

Ever since the morning a great calm. Spent nearly
the whole night in meditation, in prayer. Suddenly I
was conscious of a kind of luminous peace like the
imagination I had as a child of the Holy Ghost: it
seemed to wrap me round, to descend into me. I went
to bed at once fearing that my joy was due only to
nervous exaltation. I went to sleep fairly quickly with-
out this felicity leaving me. It is still here this morning
in all its completeness. I have the certainty now that he
will come.

^oth September

Jerome, my friend I you whom I still call brother, but
whom I love infinitely more than a brother . . . How
many times I have cried your name in the beech copse!
Every evening towards dusk I go out by the little gate
of the kitchen-garden and walk down the avenue where
it is already dark. If you were suddenly to answer me,
if you were to appear there from behind the stony bank
round which I so eagerly seek you, or if I were to see
you in the distance, seated on the bench waiting for me,
my heart would not leap ... no 1 1 am astonished at not
seeing you.


133



ist October

Nothing yet. The sun has set in a sky of incompar-
able purity. I am waiting. I know that soon I shall be
sitting with him on this very bench. I hear his voice
already. I like it so much when he says my name. He
will be here! I shall put my hand in his hand. I shall let
my head lean on his shoulder. I shall breathe beside
him. Yesterday I brought out some of his letters with
me to re-read, but I did not look at them - 1 was too
much taken up with the thought of him. I took with
me, too, the amethyst cross he used to like and which
I used to wear one summer every evening as long as I
did not want him to go. I should like to give him this
cross. For a long time past I have had a dream - that he
was married and I godmother to his first daughter, a
little Alissa, to whom I gave this ornament. . . . Why
have I never dared tell him?

znd October

My soul to-day is as light and joyful as a bird would
be that had made its nest in the sky. For to-day he will
come. I feel itl I know it 1 1 should like to proclaim it
aloud to the world. I feel I must write it here. I cannot
hide my joy any longer. Even Robert, who is usually so
inattentive and indifferent to what concerns me, noticed
it. His questions embarrassed me and I did not know
what to answer. How shall I be able to wait till this
evening? ...

Some kind of strange transparent bandage over my
eyes seems to show me his image everywhere - his
image magnified, and all love’s rays are concentrated on
a single burning spot in my heart.

Oh I how this waiting tires me I

134



Lord, unclose for me one moment the wide gateways
of gladness.


^rd October

All is over. Alas I he has slipped out of my arms like
a shadow. He was here! He was here ! I feel him still.
I call him. My hands, my lips seek iiim in vain in the
night. . . .

I can neither pray nor sleep. I went out again into the
dark garden. I was afraid - in my room - everywhere
in the house - I was afraid. My anguish brought me
once more to the door behind which I had left him. I
opened it with a mad hope that he might have come
back. I called. I groped in the darkness. I have come in
again to write to him. I cannot accept my grief.

What has happened? What did I say to him? What
did I do? Why do I always want to exaggerate my
virtue to him? What can be the worth of a virtue which
my whole heart denies? I was secretly false to the words
which God set upon my lips. In spite of all that my
heart was bursting with, I could bring nothing out.
Jerome ! Jerome, my unhappy friend in whose presence
my heart bleeds and in whose absence I perish, believe
nothing of ail I said to you just now, but the words
spoken by my love.

Tore up my letter, then wrote again. . . . Here is the
dawn, grey, wet with tears, as sad as my thoughts. I
hear the first sounds of the farm and everything that
was sleeping re-awakens to life. ... ‘Arise, now. The
hour is at hand.

My letter shall not go.

^35



%th October

Oh, jealous God, who hast despoiled me, take Thou
possession of my heart. All warmth henceforth has for-
saken it; nothing will touch it more. Help me to
triumph over the melancholy remnant of myself. This
house, this garden encourage my love intolerably. I
must fly to some place where I shall see none but Thee.

Thou wilt help me to bestow upon Thy poor what
fortune I possessed; let me leave Fongueusemare,
which I cannot dispose of easily, to Robert. I have
made my will, it is true, but I am ignorant of the neces-
sary formalities and yesterday I could not talk to the
lawyer properly, as I was afraid he might suspect the
decision I had taken and warn Juliette and Robert. I
will finish this business in Paris.

loth October

Arrived here so tired that I was obliged to stay in bed
the first two days. The doctor, who was sent for against
my will, speaks of an operation which he considers
necessary. What is the use of objecting? But I easily
made him believe that I was frightened at the idea of an
, operation and preferred waiting till I had ‘ regained my
Istrength a little’.

' I have managed to conceal my name and address.
I have deposited enough money with the management
of the house for them to make no difficulty about taking
me in and keeping me for as long as God shall con-
tinue to think it necessary.

I like this room. The walls need no other decoration
than their perfect cleanliness. I was quite astonished to
feel almost joyful. The reason is that I expect nothing
136



more from life ■« that I must be content now with God,
and His love is sweet only if it dHs to completion what-
ever space there is within us

The only book I have brought with me is the Bible :
but to-day there sounded in me louder than any words
I iind there, this wild and passionate sob of Pascal^s :
‘Whatever is not God cannot satisfy my longing/

Oh! too human joy, that my imprudent heart desired!

. . .Was it to wring this cry from me. Lord, that Thou
hast thus bereft me?

Tzth October

Thy Kingdom come! May it come in me; so that
Thou alone mayest reign over me and reign over the
whole of me. I will no longer grudge Thee my heart.

Though I am as tired as if I were very old, my soul
keeps a strange childishness. I am still the little girl,
who could not go to sleep before everything ia her
room was tidy and the clones she had taken off neatly

folded beside her bed That is how I should like to

get ready to die.

\^th October

Re-read my journal before destroying it. ‘It is un-
worthy of noble natures to spread round them the dis-
turbance they feel/ It is, I think, Clotiide de Vaux who
says this so finely.

Just as I was going to throw this journal into the fire,
I felt a kind of warning which held me back. It seemed
to me that it no longer belonged to me, that I had no
right to deprive Jerome of it, that I had never written
it except for him. My anxieties, my doubts seem to me

137



now so foolish that I can no longer attach any import-
ance to them, or believe that they will disturb Jerome.
My God, grant that he may at times catch in these lines
the unskilled accent of a heart, passionately desirous of
urging him to those heights of virtue which I myself
despaired of reaching.

‘My God, lead me to the rock that is higher than I.’

October

‘Joy, joy, joy, tears of joy . .

Above human joy and beyond all suffering, yes, I
foresee that radiant joy. The ‘rock that Is liigher than
I ’ bears, I know, the name of happiness ... I understand
that my whole life has been vain, except in so far as it
culminates in happiness. ... Ahl Lord, but Thy pro-
mise to the pure and renouncing soul was this : ‘Blessed
from henceforth^ said Thy holy word, ‘Blessed are they
which die in the Lord from henceforth.^ Must I wait
until I die? This is the point where my faith wavers.
Lord 1 1 cry unto Thee with all my strength. I am in the
night 1 1 am waiting for the dawn, I cry unto Thee with
a crying that wastes me to death. Come and slake the
thirst of my heart. It is now, at once, that I thirst for
happiness. ... Or ought I to persuade myself that I have
it? And as the pipe of the impatient bird before day-
break calls rather than heralds the light, ought I to sing,
without waiting for the night to dwindle?

\Uh October

Jerome, I wish I could teach you perfect joy.

This morning I was shattered by a fit of sickness.
And afterwards I felt so weak that for a moment I

* Quotation from Pascal. (Translator's note.)

138



hoped I was going to die. But no ; first a great calm fell
upon my whole being; then a pang of anguish pierced
me, a shudder of my fiesh and soul; it was like the
sudden and disenchanting illumination of my life. It
seemed to me that I ssiw for the first time the wails of
my room in their atrocious bareness. I was seised with
fear. Even now I am writing to reassure myself, to
calm myself. O Lord! may I reach the end without
blasphemy!

I was able to get up again. I went down on my knees
like a child. ...

I should like to die now, quickly, before again realis-
ing that I am alone.


139



I SAW Juliette again last year. More than ten years
had gone by since her last letter, in which she told me
of Alissa’s death. A journey to Provence gave me an
opjx)rtunity of stopping at Nimes. The Teissites oc-
cupy an important house in the Avenue de Feuchtes,
in a noisy and central part of the town. Although I had
written to announce my arrival, it was with consider-
able emotion that I crossed the threshold.

A maidservant showed me into the drawing-room,
where Juliette joined me in a few minutes. I thought I
saw Aunt Plantier - the same gait, the same stoutness,
the same breathless hospitality. She inamediately began
plying me with questions (without waiting for my
answers) as to my career, my manner of living in Paris,
my occupations, my acquaintances ; what was my busi-
ness in the South? Wby shouldn’t I go on to Aigues-
Vives, where fidouard would be so happy to see me?

Then she gave me news of all the family, talked of
her husband, her children, her brother, of the last vin-
tage, of the autumn prices. ... I learnt that Robert had
sold Fongueusemare in order to live at Aigues-Vives :
that he was now fidouard’s partner, which left her
husband free to travel, and in pardcular to look after
the commercial side of the business, whilst Robert
stayed on the land, improving and increasing the
plantations.

In the meantime I was uneasily looking round for
anything that might recall the past. I recognized, in-
deed, amongst the otherwise new furniture of the
140



drawing-room, certain pieces tihat came from Fongueu-
semare ; but of the past which was quivering within
me, Juliette now seemed to be oblivious, or else to be
endeavouring to distract our thoughts from it.

Two boys of twelve and thirteen were playing on the
stairs ; she called them in to introduce them to me. Lise,
the eldest of her children, had gone with her father to
Aigues-Vives. Another boy of ten was expected in from
his walk ; it was he whos%advent Juliette had told me
of in the same letter in which she had announced our
bereavement. There had been some trouble over this
last confinement ; Juliette had suffered from its effects
for a long time ; then last year, as an afterthought, she
had given birth to a little girl, whom, to hear her talk,
she preferred to all her other children.

‘My room, where she sleeps, is next door,’ said she ;
‘come and see her.’ And as I was following her: ‘Je-
rome, I didn’t dare write to you . . . would you consent
to be the baby’s godfather?’

‘Yes, with pleasure, if you would like me to,’ said I,
slightly surprised, ks I bent over the cradle. ‘What is
my god-daughter’s name?’

‘Alissa replied Juliette, in a whisper. ‘She is a
little like her, don’t you think so?’

I pressed Juliette’s hand, without answering. Little
Alissa, whom her mother lifted, opened her eyes ; I
took her in my arms.

‘What a good father you would make!’ said Juliette,
trying to laugh. ‘What are you waiting for to marry?’

‘To have forgotten a great many things,’ I replied,
and watched her blush.

‘Which you are hoping to forget soon?’

‘Which I do not hope ever to forget,’

J4I



‘Come in hete,’ said she, abruptly, leading the way
into a smaller room, which was already dark, and of
which one door led into her bedroom, and another
into the drawing-room. ‘This is where I take refuge
when I have a moment to myself ; it is the quietest room
in the house ; I feel that I am almost sheltered from life
in here.’

The window of this small drawing-room did not
open, like those of the othejaarooms, on to the noises of
the town, but on to a sort of courtyard planted with
trees.

‘Let us sit down,’ said she, dropping into an arm-
chair. ‘If I understood you rightly it is to AHssa’s
memory that you mean to remain faithful.’

I stayed a moment without answering.

‘Rather, perhaps, to her idea of me. No, don’t give
me any credit for it. I think I couldn’t do otherwise. If
I married another woman, I could only pretend to love
her.’

‘ Ahl ’ said she, as though indifferently, then turning
her face away from me, she bent it towards the ground,
as if she were looking for something she had lost.* Then
you think that one can keep a hopeless love in one’s
heart for so long as that?’

‘Yes, Juliette.’

‘And that life can breathe upon it every day, without
extinguishing it?’

The evening came slowly up like a grey tide, reach-
ing and flooding each object which seemed to come to
life again in the gloom and repeat in a whisper the
story of its past. Once more I saw Ahssa’s room, all the
furniture of which JuHette had collected together here.
And then she turned her face towards me again, but it


142



was too dark for me to distingnisii her features, so that
I did not know whether her eyes were shut or not.- 1
thought her very beautiful. And we both now remained
without speaking.

‘Comer said she at last: ‘we must wake up/

I saw her rise, take a step forward, drop again, as
though she had no strength, into the nearest chair ; she
put her hands up to her face and I thought I saw that
she was crying.

A servant came in, bringing the lamp.
